He thought he had already, poor John Berridge, tasted in their
fullness the sweets of success; but nothing yet had been more charming
to him than when the young Lord, as he irresistibly and, for greater
certitude, quite correctly figured him, fairly sought out, in Paris, the
new literary star that had begun to hang, with a fresh red light, over
the vast, even though rather confused, Anglo-Saxon horizon; positively
approaching that celebrity with a shy and artless appeal. The young Lord
invoked on this occasion the celebrity's prized judgement of a special
literary case; and Berridge could take the whole manner of it for one of
the 'quaintest' little acts displayed to his amused eyes, up to now, on
the stage of European society -- albeit these eyes were quite aware, in
general, of missing everywhere no more of the human scene than possible,
and of having of late been particularly awake to the large extensions of
it spread before him (since so he could but fondly read his fate) under
the omen of his prodigious 'hit'. It [2] was because of his hit that he
was having rare opportunities -- of which he was so honestly and humbly
proposing, as he would have said, to make the most: it was because every
one in the world (so far had the thing gone) was reading __The Heart of
Gold__ as just a slightly too fat volume, or sitting out the same as
just a fifth-act too long play, that he found himself floated on a tide
he would scarce have dared to show his favourite hero sustained by,
found a hundred agreeable and interesting things happen to him which
were all, one way or another, affluents of the golden stream.
  The great renewed resonance -- renewed by the incredible luck of the
play -- was always in his ears without so much as a conscious turn of
his head to listen; so that the queer world of his fame was not the mere
usual field of the Anglo-Saxon boom, but positively the bottom of the
_whole_ theatric sea, unplumbed source of the wave that had borne him in
the course of a year or two over German, French, Italian, Russian,
Scandinavian foot-lights. Paris itself really appeared for the hour the
centre of his cyclone, with reports and 'returns', to say nothing of
agents and emissaries, converging from the minor capitals; though his
impatience was scarce the less keen to get back to London, where his
work had had no such critical excoriation to survive, no such lesson of
anguish to learn, as it had received at the hand of supreme authority,
of that French authority which was in such a matter the only one to be
artistically [3] reckoned with. If his spirit indeed had had to reckon
with it his fourth act practically hadn't: it continued to make him
blush every night for the public more even than the inimitable
_feuilleton_ had made him blush for himself.
  This had figured, however, after all, the one bad drop in his cup; so
that, for the rest, his high-water mark might well have been, that
evening at Gloriani's studio, the approach of his odd and charming
applicant, vaguely introduced at the latter's very own request by their
hostess, who, with an honest, helpless, genial gesture, washed her fat
begemmed hands of the name and identity of either, but left the fresh,
fair, ever so habitually assured, yet ever so easily awkward Englishman
with his plea to put forth. There was that in this pleasant personage
which could still make Berridge wonder what conception of profit from
him might have, all incalculably, taken form in such a head -- these
being truly the last intrenchments of our hero's modesty. He wondered,
the splendid young man, he wondered awfully, he wondered (it was
unmistakable) quite nervously, he wondered, to John's ardent and acute
imagination, quite beautifully, if the author of __The Heart of Gold__
would mind just looking at a book by a friend of his, a great friend,
which he himself believed rather clever, and had in fact found very
charming, but as to which -- if it really wouldn't bore Mr Berridge --
he should so like the verdict of some one who knew. His friend was
awfully ambitious, and [4] he thought there was something in it -- with
all of which might he send the book to any address?
  Berridge thought of many things while the young Lord thus charged upon
him, and it was odd that no one of them was any question of the possible
worth of the offered achievement -- which, for that matter, was certain
to be of the quality of _all_ the books, to say nothing of the plays,
and the projects for plays, with which, for some time past, he had seen
his daily postbag distended. He had made out, on looking at these
things, no difference at all from one to the other. Here, however, was
something more -- something that made his fellow-guest's overture
_independently_ interesting and, as he might imagine, important. He
smiled, he was friendly and vague; said "A work of fiction, I suppose?"
and that he didn't pretend ever to pronounce, that he in fact quite
hated, always, to have to, not 'knowing', as he felt, any better than
anyone else; but would gladly look at anything, under that demur, if it
would give any pleasure. Perhaps the very brightest and most
diamond-like twinkle he had yet seen the star of his renown emit was
just the light brought into his young Lord's eyes by this so easy
consent to oblige. It was easy because the presence before him was from
moment to moment referring itself back to some recent observation or
memory; something caught somewhere, within a few weeks or months, as he
had moved about, and that seemed to flutter forth at this stir of the
folded leaves of his recent experience very much as a gathered [5] faded
flower, placed there for 'pressing', might drop from between the pages
of a volume opened at hazard.
  He had seen him before, this splendid and sympathetic person -- whose
flattering appeal was by no means _all_ that made him sympathetic; he
had met him, had noted, had wondered about him, had in fact
imaginatively, intellectually, so to speak, quite yearned over him, in
some conjunction lately, though ever so fleetingly, apprehended: which
circumstance constituted precisely an association as tormenting, for the
few minutes, as it was vague, and set him to sounding, intensely and
vainly, the face that itself figured everything agreeable except
recognition. He couldn't remember, and the young man didn't; distinctly,
yes, they had been in presence, during the previous winter, by some
chance of travel, through Sicily, through Italy, through the south of
France, but his _Seigneurie_ -- so Berridge liked exotically to phrase
it -- had then (in ignorance of the present reasons) not noticed _him_.
It was positive for the man of established identity, all the while too,
and through the perfect lucidity of his sense of achievement in an air
'conducting' nothing but the loudest bang, that this was fundamentally
much less remarkable than the fact of his being made up to in such a
quarter now. That was the disservice, in a manner, of one's having so
much imagination: the mysterious values of other types kept looming
larger before you than the doubtless often higher but comparatively
familiar ones of [6] your own, and if you had anything of the artist's
real feeling for life the attraction and amusement of possibilities so
projected were worth more to you, in nineteen moods out of twenty, than
the sufficiency, the serenity, the felicity, whatever it might be, of
your stale personal certitudes. You were intellectually, you were
'artistically' rather abject, in fine, if your curiosity (in the grand
sense of the term) wasn't worth more to you than your dignity. What
_was_ your dignity, 'anyway', but just the consistency of your
curiosity, and what moments were ever so ignoble for you as, under the
blighting breath of the false gods, stupid conventions, traditions,
examples, your lapses from that consistency? His _Seigneurie_, at all
events, delightfully, hadn't the least real idea of what any John
Berridge was talking about, and the latter felt that if he had been less
beautifully witless, and thereby less true to his right figure, it might
scarce have been forgiven him.
  His right figure was that of life in irreflective joy and at the
highest thinkable level of prepared security and unconscious insolence.
What was the pale page of fiction compared with the intimately personal
adventure that, in almost any direction, he would have been all so
stupidly, all so gallantly, all so instinctively and, by every
presumption, so prevailingly ready for? Berridge would have given six
months' 'royalties' for even an hour of his looser dormant consciousness
-- since one was oneself, after all, no worm, but an heir of all the
ages too -- and yet without being [7] able to supply chapter and verse
for the felt, the huge difference. His _Seigneurie_ was tall and
straight, but so, thank goodness, was the author of __The Heart of
Gold__, who had no such vulgar 'mug' either; and there was no intrinsic
inferiority in being a bit inordinately, and so it might have seemed a
bit strikingly, black-browed instead of being fair as the morning. Again
while his new friend delivered himself our own tried in vain to place
him; he indulged in plenty of pleasant, if rather restlessly headlong
sound, the confessed incoherence of a happy mortal who had always many
things 'on', and who, while waiting at any moment for connections and
consummations, had fallen into the way of talking, as they said, all
artlessly, and a trifle more betrayingly, against time. He would always
be having appointments, and somehow of a high 'romantic' order, to keep,
and the imperfect punctualities of others to wait for -- though who
would be of a quality to make such a pampered personage wait very much
our young analyst could only enjoy asking himself. There were women who
might be of a quality -- half a dozen of those perhaps, of those alone,
about the world; our friend was as sure of this, by the end of four
minutes, as if he knew all about it.
  After saying he would send him the book the young Lord indeed dropped
that subject; he had asked where he might send it, and had had an "Oh, I
shall remember!" on John's mention of an hotel; but he had made no
further dash into literature, and it was [8] ten to one that this would
be the last the distinguished author might hear of the volume. Such
again was a note of these high existences -- that made one content to
ask of them no whit of other consistency than that of carrying off the
particular occasion, whatever it might be, in a dazzle of amiability and
felicity and leaving _that_ as a sufficient trace of their passage.
Sought and achieved consistency was but an angular, a secondary motion;
compared with the air of complete freedom it might have an effect of
deformity. There was no placing this figure of radiant ease, for
Berridge, in any relation that didn't appear not good enough -- that is
among the relations that hadn't been too good for Berridge himself. He
was all right where he was; the great Gloriani somehow made that law;
his house, with his supreme artistic position, was good enough for
anyone, and to-night in especial there were charming people, more
charming than our friend could recall from any other scene, as the
natural train or circle, as he might say, of such a presence. For an
instant he thought he had got the face as a specimen of imperturbability
watched, with wonder, across the hushed rattle of roulette at Monte
Carlo; but this quickly became as improbable as any question of a vulgar
_table d'h^ote_, or a steam-boat deck, or a herd of fellow-pilgrims
cicerone-led, or even an opera-box serving, during a performance, for
frame of a type observed from the stalls. One placed young gods and
goddesses only when one placed them on Olympus, and it met the case,
always, that they [9] were of Olympian race, and that they glimmered for
one, at the best, through their silver cloud, like the visiting
apparitions in an epic.
  This was brief and beautiful indeed till something happened that gave
it, for Berridge, on the spot, a prodigious extension -- an extension
really as prodigious, after a little, as if he had suddenly seen the
silver clouds multiply and then the whole of Olympus presently open.
Music, breaking upon the large air, enjoined immediate attention, and in
a moment he was listening, with the rest of the company, to an eminent
tenor, who stood by the piano; and was aware, with it, that his
Englishman had turned away and that in the vast, rich, tapestried room
where, in spite of figures and objects so numerous, clear spaces, wide
vistas and, as they might be called, becoming situations abounded, there
had been from elsewhere, at the signal of unmistakable song, a rapid
accession of guests. At first he but took this in, and the way that
several young women, for whom seats had been found, looked charming in
the rapt attitude; while even the men, mostly standing and grouped,
'composed', in their stillness, scarce less impressively, under the sway
of the divine voice. It ruled the scene, to the last intensity, and yet
our young man's fine sense found still a resource in the range of the
eyes, without sound or motion, while all the rest of consciousness was
held down as by a hand mailed in silver. It was better, in this way,
than the opera -- John alertly thought of that: the composition [10]
sung might be Wagnerian, but no Tristram, no Iseult, no Parsifal and no
Kundry of them all could ever show, could ever 'act' to the music, as
our friend had thus the power of seeing his dear contemporaries of
either sex (armoured _they_ so otherwise than in cheap Teutonic tinsel!)
just continuously and inscrutably sit to it.
  It made, the whole thing together, an enchantment amid which he had in
truth, at a given moment, ceased to distinguish parts -- so that he was
himself certainly at last soaring as high as the singer's voice and
forgetting, in a lost gaze at the splendid ceiling, everything of the
occasion but what his intelligence poured into it. This, as happened,
was a flight so sublime that by the time he had dropped his eyes again a
cluster of persons near the main door had just parted to give way to a
belated lady who slipped in, through the gap made for her, and stood for
some minutes full in his view. It was a proof of the perfect hush that
no one stirred to offer her a seat, and her entrance, in her high grace,
had yet been so noiseless that she could remain at once immensely
exposed and completely unabashed. For Berridge, once more, if the scenic
show before him so melted into the music, here precisely might have been
the heroine herself advancing to the footlights at her cue. The interest
deepened to a thrill, and everything, at the touch of his recognition of
this personage, absolutely the most beautiful woman now present, fell
exquisitely together and gave him what he had been wanting [11] from the
moment of his taking in his young Englishman.
  It was there, the missing connection: her arrival had on the instant
lighted it by a flash. Olympian herself, supremely, divinely Olympian,
she had arrived, could _only_ have arrived, for the one person present
of really equal race, our young man's late converser, whose flattering
demonstration might now stand for one of the odd extravagant forms taken
by nervous impatience. This charming, this dazzling woman had been one
member of the couple disturbed, to his intimate conviction, the autumn
previous, on his being pushed by the officials, at the last moment, into
a compartment of the train that was to take him from Cremona to Mantua
-- where, failing a stop, he had had to keep his place. The other
member, by whose felt but unseized identity he had been haunted, was the
unconsciously insolent form of guaranteed happiness he had just been
engaged with. The sense of the admirable intimacy that, having taken its
precautions, had not reckoned with his irruption -- this image had
remained with him; to say nothing of the interest of aspect of the
associated figures, so stamped somehow with rarity, so beautifully
distinct from the common occupants of padded corners, and yet on the
subject of whom, for the romantic structure he was immediately to raise,
he had not had a scrap of evidence.
  If he had imputed to them conditions it was all his own doing: it came
from his inveterate habit of abysmal imputation, the snatching of the
ell wherever [12] the inch peeped out, without which where would have
been the tolerability of life? It didn't matter now what he had imputed
-- and he always held that his expenses of imputation were, at the
worst, a compliment to those inspiring them. It only mattered that each
of the pair had been then what he really saw each now -- full, that is,
of the pride of their youth and beauty and fortune and freedom, though
at the same time particularly preoccupied: preoccupied, that is, with
the affairs, and above all with the passions, of Olympus. Who had they
been, and what? Whence had they come, whither were they bound, what tie
united them, what adventure engaged, what felicity, tempered by what
peril, magnificently, dramatically attended? These had been his
questions, all so inevitable and so impertinent, at the time, and to the
exclusion of any scruples over his not postulating an inane honeymoon,
his not taking the 'tie', as he should doubtless properly have done, for
the mere blest matrimonial; and he now retracted not one of them,
flushing as they did before him again with their old momentary life. To
feel his two friends renewedly in presence -- friends of the fleeting
hour though they had but been, and with whom he had exchanged no sign
save the vaguest of salutes on finally relieving them of his company --
was only to be conscious that he hadn't, on the spot, done them, so to
speak, half justice, and that, for his superior entertainment, there
would be ever so much more of them to come.

[13]
                          -=-=-  2  -=-=-

  It might already have been coming indeed, with an immense stride,
when, scarce more than ten minutes later, he was aware that the
distinguished stranger had brought the Princess straight across the room
to speak to him. He had failed in the interval of any glimpse of their
closer meeting; for the great tenor had sung another song and then
stopped, immediately on which Madame Gloriani had made his pulse quicken
to a different, if not to a finer, throb by hovering before him once
more with the man in the world he most admired, as it were, looking at
him over her shoulder. The man in the world he most admired, the
greatest then of contemporary Dramatists -- and bearing, independently,
the name inscribed if not in deepest incision at least in thickest
gilding on the rich recreative roll -- this prodigious personage was
actually to suffer 'presentation' to him at the good lady's generous but
ineffectual hands, and had in fact the next instant, left alone with
him, bowed, in formal salutation, the massive, curly, witty head, so
'romantic' yet so modern, so 'artistic' and ironic yet somehow so civic,
so Gallic yet somehow so cosmic, his personal vision of which had not
hitherto transcended that of the possessor of a signed and framed
photograph in a consecrated quarter of a writing-table.
  It was positive, however, that poor John was afterward [14] to
remember of this conjunction nothing whatever but the fact of the great
man's looking at him very hard, straight in the eyes, and of his not
having himself scrupled to do as much, and with a confessed intensity of
appetite. It was improbable, he was to recognise, that they had, for the
few minutes, only stared and grimaced, like pitted boxers or wrestlers;
but what had abode with him later on, none the less, was just the
cherished memory of his not having so lost presence of mind as to fail
of feeding on his impression. It was precious and precarious, that was
perhaps all there would be of it; and his subsequent consciousness was
quite to cherish this queer view of the silence, neither awkward nor
empty nor harsh, but on the contrary quite charged and brimming, that
represented for him his use, his unforgettable enjoyment in fact, of his
opportunity. Had nothing passed in words? Well, no misery of murmured
'homage', thank goodness; though something must have been said,
certainly, to lead up, as they put it at the theatre, to John's having
asked the head of the profession, before they separated, if he by chance
knew who the so radiantly handsome young woman might be, the one who had
so lately come in and who wore the pale yellow dress, of the strange
tone, and the magnificent pearls. They must have separated soon, it was
further to have been noted; since it was before the advance of the pair,
their wonderful dazzling charge upon him, that he had distinctly seen
the great man, at a distance [15] again, block out from his sight the
harmony of the faded gold and the pearls -- to speak only of that -- and
plant himself there (the mere high Atlas-back of renown to Berridge now)
as for communion with them. He had blocked everything out, to this tune,
effectually; with nothing of the matter left for our friend meanwhile
but that, as he had said, the beautiful lady was the Princess. What
Princess, or the Princess of what? -- our young man had afterward
wondered; his companion's reply having lost itself in the prelude of an
outburst by another vocalist who had approached the piano.
  It was after these things that she so incredibly came to him, attended
by her adorer -- since he took it for absolute that the young Lord was
her adorer, as who indeed mightn't be? -- and scarce waiting, in her
bright simplicity, for any form of introduction. It may thus be said in
a word that this was the manner in which she made our hero's
acquaintance, a satisfaction that she on the spot described to him as
really wanting of late to her felicity. "I've read everything, you know,
and __The Heart of Gold__ three times": she put it all immediately on
that ground, while the young Lord now smiled, beside her, as if it were
quite the sort of thing he had done too; and while, further, the author
of the work yielded to the consciousness that whereas in general he had
come at last scarce to be able to bear the iteration of those words,
which affected him as mere vain vocal convulsion, so not a breath of
this association now attended [16] them, so such a person as the
Princess could make of them what she would. Unless it was to be really
what _he_ would! -- this occurred to him in the very thick of the
prodigy, no single shade of possibility of which was less prodigious
than any other. It was a declaration, simply, the admirable young woman
was treating him to, a profession of 'artistic sympathy' -- for she was
in a moment to use this very term that made for them a large, clear,
common ether, an element all uplifted and rare, of which they could
equally partake.
  If she was Olympian -- as in her rich and regular young beauty, that
of some divine Greek mask overpainted say by Titian, she more and more
appeared to him -- this offered air was that of the gods themselves: she
might have been, with her long rustle across the room, Artemis
decorated, hung with pearls, for her worshippers, yet disconcerting them
by having under an impulse just faintly fierce, snatched the cup of gold
from Hebe. It was to him, John Berridge, she thus publicly offered it;
and it was his over-topping _confr`ere_ of shortly before who was the
worshipper most disconcerted. John had happened to catch, even at its
distance, after these friends had joined him, the momentary deep, grave
estimate, in the great Dramatist's salient watching eyes, of the
Princess's so singular performance: the touch perhaps this, in the whole
business, that made Berridge's sense of it most sharp. The sense of it
as _prodigy_ didn't in the least entail his feeling abject [17] -- any
more, that is, than in the due dazzled degree; for surely there would
have been supreme wonder in the eagerness of her exchange of mature
glory for thin notoriety, hadn't it still exceeded everything that an
Olympian of such race should have found herself bothered, as they said,
to 'read' at all -- and most of all to read three times!
  With the turn the matter took as an effect of this meeting, Berridge
was more than once to find himself almost ashamed for her -- since it
seemed never to occur to her to be so for herself; he was jealous of the
type where she might have been taken as insolently careless of it; his
advantage (unless indeed it had been his ruin) being that he could
inordinately reflect upon it, could wander off thereby into kinds of
licence of which she was incapable. He hadn't, for himself, waited till
now to be sure of what he would do were _he_ an Olympian; he would leave
his own stuff snugly unread, to begin with; that would be a beautiful
start for an Olympian career. He should have been as unable to write
those works in short as to make anything else of them; and he should
have had no more arithmetic for computing fingers than any
perfect-headed marble Apollo mutilated at the wrists. He should have
consented to know but the grand personal adventure on the grand personal
basis: nothing short of this, no poor cognizance of confusable,
pettifogging things, the sphere of earth-grubbing questions and twopenny
issues, would begin to be, on any side, Olympian enough. [18]
  Even the great Dramatist, with his tempered and tested steel and his
immense 'assured' position, even he was not Olympian: the look, full of
the torment of earth, with which he had seen the Princess turn her back,
and for such a purpose, on the prized privilege of his notice, testified
sufficiently to that. Still, comparatively, it was to be said, the
question of a personal relation with an authority so eminent on the
subject of the passions -- to say nothing of the rest of his charm --
might have had for an ardent young woman (and the Princess was
unmistakably ardent) the absolute attraction of romance: unless, again,
prodigy of prodigies, she were looking for her romance very particularly
elsewhere. Yet where could she have been looking for it, Berridge was to
ask himself with private intensity, in a manner to leave her so at her
ease for appearing to offer _him_ everything? -- so free to be quite
divinely gentle with him, to hover there before him in all her mild,
bright, smooth sublimity and to say: "I should be so very grateful if
you'd come to see me."
  There succeeded this a space of time of which he was afterward to lose
all account, was never to recover the history; his only coherent view of
it being that an interruption, some incident that kept them a while
separate, had then taken place, yet that during their separation, of
half an hour or whatever, they had still somehow not lost sight of each
other, but had found their eyes meeting, in deep communion, all across
the great peopled room; meeting and wanting [19] to meet, wanting -- it
was the most extraordinary thing in the world for the suppression of
stages, for confessed precipitate intensity -- to use together every
instant of the hour that might be left them. Yet to use it for what? --
unless, like beautiful fabulous figures in some old-world legend, for
the frankest and almost the crudest avowal of the impression they had
made on each other. He couldn't have named, later on, any other person
she had during this space been engaged with, any more than he was to
remember in the least what he had himself ostensibly done, who had
spoken to him, whom he had spoken to, or whether he hadn't just stood
and publicly gaped or languished.
  Ah, Olympians were unconventional indeed -- that was a part of their
high bravery and privilege; but what it also appeared to attest in this
wondrous manner was that they could communicate to their chosen in three
minutes, by the mere light of their eyes, the same shining cynicism. He
was to wonder of course, tinglingly enough, whether he had really made
an ass of himself, and there was this amount of evidence for it that
there certainly _had_ been a series of moments each one of which glowed
with the lucid sense that, as she couldn't like him as much as _that_
either for his acted clap-trap or for his printed verbiage, what it must
come to was that she liked him, and to such a tune, just for himself and
quite after no other fashion than that in which every goddess in the
calendar had, when you came to look, [20] sooner or later liked some
prepossessing young shepherd. The question would thus have been, for
him, with a still sharper eventual ache, of whether he positively _had_,
as an effect of the miracle, been petrified, before fifty pair of eyes,
to the posture of a prepossessing shepherd -- and would perhaps have
left him under the shadow of some such imputable fatuity if his
consciousness hadn't, at a given moment, cleared up to still stranger
things.
  The agent of the change was, as quite congruously happened, none other
than the shining youth whom he now seemed to himself to have been
thinking of for ever so long, for a much longer time than he had ever in
his life spent at an evening party, as the young Lord: which personage
suddenly stood before him again, holding him up an odd object and
smiling, as if in reference to it, with a gladness that at once struck
our friend as almost too absurd for belief. The object was incongruous
by reason of its being, to a second and less pre-occupied glance, a
book; and what had befallen Berridge within twenty minutes was that they
-- the Princess and he, that is -- had got such millions of miles, or at
least such thousands of years, away from _those_ platitudes. The book,
he found himself assuming, could only be _his_ book (it seemed also to
have a tawdry red cover); and there came to him memories, dreadfully
false notes sounded so straight again by his new acquaintance, of
certain altogether different persons who at certain altogether different
parties had flourished [21] volumes before him very much with that
insinuating gesture, that arch expression and that fell intention. The
meaning of these things -- of all possible breaks of the charm at such
an hour! -- was that he should 'signature' the ugly thing, and with a
characteristic quotation or sentiment: that was the way people simpered
and squirmed, the way they mouthed and beckoned, when animated by such
purposes; and it already, on the spot, almost broke his heart to see
such a type as that of the young Lord brought, by the vulgarest of
fashions, so low. This state of quick displeasure in Berridge, however,
was founded on a deeper question -- the question of how in the world he
was to remain for himself a prepossessing shepherd if he should consent
to come back to these base actualities. It was true that even while this
wonderment held him, his aggressor's perfect good conscience had placed
the matter in a slightly different light.
  "By an extraordinary chance I've found a copy of my friend's novel on
one of the tables here -- I see by the inscription that she has
presented it to Gloriani. So if you'd like to glance at it---!" And the
young Lord, in the pride of his association with the eminent thing, held
it out to Berridge as artlessly as if it had been a striking natural
specimen of some sort, a rosy round apple grown in his own orchard, or
an exceptional precious stone, to be admired for its weight and lustre.
Berridge accepted the offer mechanically -- relieved at the prompt
fading of his [22] worst fear, yet feeling in himself a tell-tale facial
blankness for the still absolutely anomalous character of his friend's
appeal. He was even tempted for a moment to lay the volume down without
looking at it -- only with some extemporised promise to borrow it of
their host and take it home, to give himself to it at an easier moment.
Then the very expression of his fellow-guest's own countenance
determined in him a different and a still more dreadful view; in fact an
immediate collapse of the dream in which he had for the splendid
previous space of time been living. The young Lord himself, in his
radiant costly barbarism, figured far better than John Berridge could do
the prepossessing shepherd, the beautiful mythological mortal
'distinguished' by a goddess; for our hero now saw that his whole manner
of dealing with his ridiculous tribute was marked exactly by the grand
simplicity, the prehistoric good faith, as one might call it, of far-off
romantic and 'plastic' creatures, figures of exquisite Arcadian stamp,
glorified rustics like those of the train of peasants in __A Winter's
Tale__, who thought nothing of such treasure-trove, on a Claude Lorrain
sea-strand, as a royal infant wrapped in purple: something in that
fabulous style of exhibition appearing exactly what his present
demonstration might have been prompted by.
  __The Top of the Tree__, by Amy Evans -- scarce credible words
floating before Berridge after he had with an anguish of effort dropped
his eyes on the importunate [23] title-page -- represented an object as
alien to the careless grace of goddess-haunted Arcady as a washed-up
'kodak' from a wrecked ship might have been to the appreciation of some
islander of wholly unvisited seas. Nothing could have been more in the
tone of an islander deplorably diverted from his native interests and
dignities than the glibness with which John's own child of nature went
on. 'It's her pen-name, Amy Evans' -- he couldn't have said it otherwise
had he been a blue-chinned penny-a-liner -- yet marking it with a
disconnectedness of intelligence that kept up all the poetry of his own
situation and only crashed into that of other persons. The reference put
the author of __The Heart of Gold__ quite into _his_ place, but left the
speaker absolutely free of Arcady. "Thanks awfully" -- Berridge somehow
clutched at that, to keep everything from swimming. "Yes, I should like
to look at it," he managed, horribly grimacing now, he believed, to say;
and there was in fact a strange short interlude after this in which he
scarce knew what had become of anyone or of anything; in which he only
seemed to himself to stand alone in a desolate place where even its
desolation didn't save him from having to stare at the greyest of
printed pages. Nothing here helped anything else, since the stamped
greyness didn't even in itself make it impossible his eyes should follow
such sentences as: 'The loveliness of the face, which was that of the
glorious period in which Pheidias reigned supreme, and which owed [24]
its most exquisite note to that shell-like curl of the upper lip which
always somehow recalls for us the smile with which wind-blown Astarte
must have risen from the salt sea to which she owed her birth and her
terrible moods'; or 'It was too much for all the passionate woman in
her, and she let herself go, over the flowering land that had been, but
was no longer, their love, with an effect of blighting desolation that
might have proceeded from one of the more physical, though not more
awful, convulsions of nature.'
  He seemed to know later on that other and much more natural things had
occurred; as that, for instance, with now at last a definite
intermission of the rare music that for a long time past, save at the
briefest intervals, had kept all participants ostensibly attentive and
motionless, and that in spite of its high quality and the supposed
privilege of listening to it he had allowed himself not to catch a note
of, there was a great rustling and shifting and vociferous drop to a
lower plane, more marked still with the quick clearance of a way to
supper and a lively dispersal of most of the guests. Hadn't he made out,
through the queer glare of appearances, though they yet somehow all came
to him as confused and unreal, that the Princess was no longer there,
wasn't even only crowded out of his range by the immediate
multiplication of her court, the obsequious court that the change of
pitch had at once permitted to close round her; that Gloriani had
offered her his arm, [25] in a gallant official way, as to the greatest
lady present, and that he was left with half a dozen persons more
knowing than the others, who had promptly taken, singly or in couples,
to a closer inspection of the fine small scattered treasures of the
studio?
  He himself stood there, rueful and stricken, nursing a silly red-bound
book under his arm very much as if he might have been holding on tight
to an upright stake, or to the nearest piece of furniture, during some
impression of a sharp earthquake-shock or of an attack of dyspeptic
dizziness; albeit indeed that he wasn't conscious of this absurd, this
instinctive nervous clutch till the thing that was to be more wonderful
than any yet suddenly flared up for him -- the sight of the Princess
again on the threshold of the room, poised there an instant, in her
exquisite grace, for recovery of some one or of something, and then, at
recognition of him, coming straight to him across the empty place as if
he alone, and nobody and nothing else, were what she incredibly wanted.
She was there, she was radiantly _at_ him, as if she had known and loved
him for ten years -- ten years during which, however, she had never
quite been able, in spite of undiscouraged attempts, to cure him, as
goddesses _had_ to cure shepherds, of his mere mortal shyness.
  "Ah no, not _that_ one!" she said at once, with her divine
familiarity; for she had in the flash of an eye 'spotted' the particular
literary production he seemed so very fondly to have possessed himself
of [26] and against which all the Amy Evans in her, as she would
doubtless have put it, clearly wished on the spot to discriminate. She
pulled it away from him; he let it go; he scarce knew what was happening
-- only made out that she distinguished the right one, the one that
should have been shown him, as blue or green or purple, and intimated
that her other friend, her fellow-Olympian, as Berridge had thought of
him from the first, really did too clumsily bungle matters, poor dear,
with his officiousness over the red one! She went on really as if she
had come for that, some such rectification, some such eagerness of
reunion with dear Mr Berridge, some talk, after all the tiresome music,
of questions really urgent; while, thanks to the supreme strangeness of
it, the high tide of golden fable floated him afresh, and her pretext
and her plea, the queerness of her offered motive, melted away after the
fashion of the enveloping clouds that do their office in epics and
idylls.
  "You didn't perhaps know I'm Amy Evans," she smiled, "or even perhaps
that I write in English -- which I love, I assure you, as much as you
can yourself do, and which gives one (doesn't it? for who should know if
not you?) the biggest of publics. I 'just love' -- don't they say? --
your American millions; and all the more that they really _take_ me for
Amy Evans, as I've just wanted to be taken, to be loved too for myself,
don't you know? -- that they haven't seemed to try at all to 'go behind'
(don't you say?) my poor dear little _nom de guerre_. But it's the new
[27] one, my last, __The Velvet Glove__, that I should like you to judge
me by -- if such a _corv'ee_ isn't too horrible for you to think of;
though I admit it's a move straight in the romantic direction -- since
after all (for I might as well make a clean breast of it) it's dear old
discredited romance that I'm most in sympathy with. I'll send you __The
Velvet Glove__ to-morrow, if you _can_ find half an hour for it; and
then -- and _then---_!" She paused as for the positive bright glory of
her meaning.
  It could only be so extraordinary, her meaning, whatever it was, that
the need in him that would -- whatever it was again! -- meet it most
absolutely formed the syllables on his lips as: "Will you be very,
_very_ kind to me?"
  "Ah, 'kind', dear Mr Berridge? 'Kind'," she splendidly laughed, "is
nothing to what---!" But she pulled herself up again an instant. "Well,
to what I want to be! Just _see_," she said, "how I want to be!" It was
exactly, he felt, what he couldn't _but_ see -- in spite of books and
publics and pen-names, in spite of the really 'decadent' perversity,
recalling that of the most irresponsibly insolent of the old Romans and
Byzantines, that could lead a creature so formed for living and
breathing her Romance, and so committed, up to the eyes, to the constant
fact of her personal immersion in it and genius for it, the dreadful
amateurish dance of ungrammatically scribbling it, with editions and
advertisements and reviews and royalties and every other futile item:
[28] since what was more of the deep essence of throbbing intercourse
itself than this very act of her having broken away from people, in the
other room, to whom he was as nought, of her having, with her
_cr^anerie_ of audacity and indifference, just turned her back on them
all as soon as she had begun to miss him? What was more of it than her
having forbidden them, by a sufficient curt ring of her own supremely
silver tone, to attempt to check or criticize her freedom, than her
having looked him up, at his distance, under all the noses he had put
out of joint, so as to let them think whatever they might -- not of
herself (much she troubled to care!) but of the new champion to be
reckoned with, the invincible young lion of the day? What was more of it
in short than her having perhaps even positively snubbed for him the
great mystified Sculptor and the great bewildered Dramatist, treated to
this queer experience for the first time of their lives?
  It all came back again to the really great ease of really great
ladies, and to the perfect facility of everything when once they were
great enough. _That_ might become the delicious thing to him, he more
and more felt, as soon as it should be supremely attested; it was ground
he had ventured on, scenically, representationally, in the artistic
sphere, but without ever dreaming he should 'realize' it thus in the
social. Handsomely, gallantly just now, moreover, he didn't so much as
let it occur to him that the social experience would perhaps on some
future occasion [29] richly profit further scenic efforts; he only lost
himself in the consciousness of all she invited him to believe. It took
licence, this consciousness, the next moment, for a tremendous further
throb, from what she had gone on to say to him in so many words --
though indeed the words were nothing and it was all a matter but of the
implication that glimmered through them: "Do you _want_ very much your
supper here?" And then while he felt himself glare, for charmed
response, almost to the point of his tears rising with it: "Because if
you don't---!"
  "Because if I don't---?" She had paused, not from the faintest shade
of timidity, but clearly for the pleasure of making him press.
  "Why shouldn't we go together, letting me drive you home?"
  "You'll come home with me?" gasped John Berridge, while the
perspiration on his brow might have been the morning dew on a high lawn
of Mount Ida.
  "No -- you had better come with _me_. That's what I mean; but I
certainly will come to you with pleasure some time if you'll let me."
  She made no more than that of the most fatuous of freedoms, as he felt
directly he had spoken that it might have seemed to her; and before he
had even time to welcome the relief of not having then himself, for
beastly contrition, to make more of it, she had simply mentioned, with
her affectionate ease, that she wanted to get away, that of the bores
[30] there she might easily, after a little, have too much, and that if
he'd but say the word they'd nip straight out together by an independent
door and be sure to find her motor in the court. What word he had found
to say, he was afterward to reflect, must have little enough mattered;
for he was to have kept, of what then occurred, but a single other
impression, that of her great fragrant rustle beside him over the rest
of the ample room and toward their nearest and friendliest resource, the
door by which he had come in and which gave directly upon a staircase.
This independent image was just that of the only other of his
fellow-guests with whom he had been closely concerned; he had thought of
him rather indeed, up to that moment, as the Princess's fellow-Olympian
-- but a new momentary vision of him seemed now to qualify it.
  The young Lord had reappeared within a minute on the threshold, that
of the passage from the supper-room, lately crossed by the Princess
herself, and Berridge felt him there, saw him there, wondered about him
there, all, for the first minute, without so much as a straight look at
him. He would have come to learn the reason of his friend's
extraordinary public demonstration -- having more right to his
curiosity, or his anxiety or whatever, than anyone else; he would be
taking in the remarkable appearances that thus completed it, and would
perhaps be showing quite a different face for them, at the point they
had reached, than any that would have hitherto [31] consorted with the
beautiful security of his own position. So much, on our own young man's
part, for this first flush of a presumption that he might have stirred
the germs of ire in a celestial breast; so much for the moment during
which nothing would have induced him to betray, to a possibly rueful
member of an old aristocracy, a vulgar elation or a tickled,
unaccustomed glee. His inevitable second thought was, however, it has to
be confessed, another matter, which took a different turn -- for,
frankly, all the conscious conqueror in him, as Amy Evans would again
have said, couldn't forego a probably supreme consecration. He treated
himself to no prolonged reach of vision, but there was something he
nevertheless fully measured for five seconds -- the sharp truth of the
fact, namely, of how the interested observer in the doorway must really
have felt about him. Rather disconcertingly, hereupon, the sharp truth
proved to be that the most amused, quite the most encouraging and the
least invidious of smiles graced the young Lord's handsome countenance
-- forming, in short, his final contribution to a display of high social
candour unprecedented in our hero's experience. No, he wasn't jealous,
didn't do John Berridge the honour to be, to the extent of the least
glimmer of a spark of it, but was so happy to see his immortal mistress
do what she liked that he could positively beam at the odd circumstance
of her almost lavishing public caresses on a gentleman not, after all,
of negligible importance.

[32]
                          -=-=-  3  -=-=-

  Well, it was all confounding enough, but this indication in particular
would have jostled our friend's grasp of the presented cup had he had,
during the next ten minutes, more independence of thought. That,
however, was out of the question when one positively felt, as with a
pang somewhere deep within, as even with a smothered cry for alarm,
one's whole sense of proportion shattered at a blow and ceasing to
serve. "Not _straight_, and not too fast, shall we?" was the ineffable
young woman's appeal to him, a few minutes later, beneath the wide glass
porch-cover that sheltered their brief wait for their chariot of fire.
It was there even as she spoke; the capped charioteer, with a great
clean curve, drew up at the steps of the porch, and the Princess's
footman, before rejoining him in front, held open the door of the car.
She got in, and Berridge was the next instant beside her; he could only
say: "As you like, Princess -- where you will; certainly let us prolong
it; let us prolong everything; don't let us have it over -- strange and
beautiful as it can only be! -- a moment sooner than we must." So he
spoke, in the security of their intimate English, while the
perpendicular imperturbable _valet-de-pied_, white-faced in the electric
light, closed them in and then took his place on the box where the rigid
liveried backs of the two men, presented through the glass, [33] were
like a protecting wall; such a guarantee of privacy as might come -- it
occurred to Berridge's inexpugnable fancy -- from a vision of tall
guards erect round Eastern seraglios.
  His companion had said something, by the time they started, about
their taking a turn, their looking out for a few of the night-views of
Paris that were so wonderful; and after that, in spite of his
constantly-prized sense of knowing his enchanted city and his way about,
he ceased to follow or measure their course, content as he was with the
particular exquisite assurance it gave him. _That_ was knowing Paris, of
a wondrous bland April night; that was hanging over it from vague
consecrated lamp-studded heights and taking in, spread below and afar,
the great scroll of all its irresistible story, pricked out, across
river and bridge and radiant _place_, and along quays and boulevards and
avenues, and around monumental circles and squares, in syllables of
fire, and sketched and summarized, further and further, in the dim
fire-dust of endless avenues; that was all of the essence of fond and
thrilled and throbbing recognition, with a thousand things understood
and a flood of response conveyed, a whole familiar possessive feeling
appealed to and attested.
  "From you, you know, it _would_ be such a pleasure, and I think -- in
fact I'm sure -- it would do so much for the thing in America." Had she
gone on as they went, or had there been pauses of easy and of charmed
and of natural silence, breaks and drops from talk, [34] but only into
greater confidence and sweetness? -- such as her very gesture now seemed
a part of; her laying her gloved hand, for emphasis, on the back of his
own, which rested on his knee and which took in from the act he scarce
knew what melting assurance. The emphasis, it was true -- this came to
him even while for a minute he held his breath -- seemed rather that of
Amy Evans; and if her talk, while they rolled, had been in the sense of
these words (he had really but felt that they were shut intimately in
together, all his consciousness, all his discrimination of meanings and
indications being so deeply and so exquisitely merged in that) the case
wasn't as surely and sublimely, as extravagantly, as fabulously romantic
for him as his excited pulses had been seeming to certify. Her hand was
there on his own, in precious living proof, and splendid Paris hung over
them, as a consecrating canopy, her purple night embroidered with gold;
yet he waited, something stranger still having glimmered for him, waited
though she left her hand, which expressed emphasis and homage and
tenderness, and anything else he liked indeed -- since it was all then a
matter of what he next heard and what he slowly grew cold as he took
from her.
  "You know they do it here so charmingly -- it's a compliment a clever
man is always so glad to pay a literary friend, and sometimes, in the
case of a great name like yours, it renders such a service to a poor
little book like mine!" She spoke ever so humbly [35] and yet ever so
gaily -- and still more than before with this confidence of the sincere
admirer and the comrade. That, yes, through his sudden sharpening chill,
was what first became distinct for him; she was mentioning somehow her
explanation and her conditions -- her motive, in fine, disconcerting,
deplorable, dreadful, in respect to the experience, otherwise so
boundless, that he had taken her as having opened to him; and she was
doing it, above all, with the clearest coolness of her general
privilege. What in particular she was talking about he as yet, still
holding his breath, wondered; it was something she wanted him to do for
her -- which was exactly what he had hoped, but something of what
trivial and, heaven forgive them both, of what dismal order? Most of
all, meanwhile, he felt the dire penetration of two or three of the
words she had used; so that after a painful minute the quaver with which
he repeated them resembled his drawing, slowly, carefully, timidly, some
barbed dart out of his flesh.
  "A 'literary friend'?" he echoed as he turned his face more to her; so
that, as they sat, the whites of her eyes, near to his own, gleamed in
the dusk like some silver setting of deep sapphires.
  It made her smile -- which in their relation now was like the breaking
of a cool air-wave over the conscious sore flush that maintained itself
through his general chill. "Ah, of course you don't allow that I _am_
literary -- and of course if you're awfully [36] cruel and critical and
incorruptible you won't let it say for me what I so want it should!"
  'Where are we, where, in the name of all that's damnably, of all
that's grotesquely delusive, are we?' he said, without a sign, to
himself; which was the form of his really being quite at sea as to what
she was talking about. That uncertainty indeed he could but frankly
betray by taking her up, as he cast about him, on the particular
ambiguity that his voice perhaps already showed him to find most
irritating. "Let _it_ show? 'It', dear Princess---?"
  "Why, my dear man, let your Preface show, the lovely, friendly,
irresistible log-rolling Preface that I've been asking you if you
wouldn't be an angel and write for me."
  He took it in with a deep long gulp -- he had never, it seemed to him,
had to swallow anything so bitter. "You've been asking me if I wouldn't
write you a Preface?"
  "To __The Velvet Glove__ -- after I've sent it to you and you've
judged if you really can. Of course I don't want you to perjure
yourself; but" -- and she fairly brushed him again, at their close
quarters, with her fresh fragrant smile -- "I do want you so to like me,
and to say it all out beautifully and publicly."
  "You want me to like you, Princess?"
  "But, heaven help us, haven't you understood?"
  Nothing stranger could conceivably have been, it struck him -- if he
was right now -- than this exquisite [37] intimacy of her manner of
setting him down on the other side of an abyss. It was as if she had
lifted him first in her beautiful arms, had raised him up high, high,
high, to do it, pressing him to her immortal young breast while he let
himself go, and then, by some extraordinary effort of her native force
and her alien quality, setting him down exactly where she wanted him to
be -- which was a thousand miles away from her. Once more, so
preposterously face to face with her for these base issues, he took it
all in; after which he felt his eyes close, for amazement, despair and
shame, and his head, which he had some time before, baring his brow to
the mild night, eased of its crush-hat, sink to confounded rest on the
upholstered back of the seat. The act, the ceasing to see, and if
possible to hear, was for the moment a retreat, an escape from a state
that he felt himself fairly flattered by thinking of it as 'awkward';
the state of really wishing that his humiliation might end, and of
wondering in fact if the most decent course open to him mightn't be to
ask her to stop the motor and let him down.
  He spoke no word for a long minute, or for considerably more than
that; during which time the motor went and went, now even somewhat
faster, and he knew, through his closed eyes, that the outer lights had
begun to multiply and that they were getting back somewhere into the
spacious and decorative quarters. He knew this, and also that his
retreat, for all his attitude as of accommodating [38] thought, his air
-- _that_ presently and quickly came to him -- of having perhaps
gathered himself in, for an instant, at her behest, to turn over, in his
high ingenuity, some humbugging 'rotten' phrase or formula that he might
place at her service and make the note of such an effort; he became
aware, I say, that his lapse was but a half-retreat, with her strenuous
presence and her earnest pressure and the close, cool respiration of her
good faith absolutely timing the moments of his stillness and the
progress of the car. Yes, it was wondrous well, he had all but made the
biggest of all fools of himself, almost as big a one as _she_ was still,
to every appearance, in her perfect serenity, trying to make of him, and
the one straight answer to it _would_ be that he should reach forward
and touch the footman's shoulder and demand that the vehicle itself
should make an end.
  That would be an answer, however, he continued intensely to see, only
to inanely importunate, to utterly superfluous Amy Evans -- not a bit to
his at last exquisitely patient companion, who was clearly now quite
taking it from him that what kept him in his attitude was the spring of
the quick desire to oblige her, the charming loyal impulse to consider a
little what he could do for her, say 'handsomely yet conscientiously'
(oh, the loveliness!) before he should commit himself. She was enchanted
-- _that_ seemed to breathe upon him; she waited, she hung there, she
quite bent over him, as Diana over the sleeping Endymion, while all the
conscientious man [39] of letters in him, as she might so supremely have
phrased it, struggled with the more peccable, the more muddled and
'squared', though, for her own ideal, the so much more _banal_ comrade.
Yes, he could keep it up now -- that is he could hold out for his real
reply, could meet the rather marked tension of the rest of their passage
as well as she; he should be able somehow or other to make his wordless
detachment, the tribute of his ostensibly deep consideration of her
request, a retreat in good order. She _was_, for herself, to the last
point of her guileless fatuity, Amy Evans and an asker for 'lifts', a
conceiver of twaddle both in herself and in him; or at least, so far as
she fell short of all this platitude, it was no fault of the really
affecting folly of her attempt to become a mere magazine mortal after
the only fashion she had made out, to the intensification of her
self-complacency, that she might.
  Nothing might thus have touched him more -- if to be touched, beyond a
certain point, hadn't been to be squared -- than the way she failed to
divine the bearing of his thoughts; so that she had probably at no one
small crisis of her life felt so much a promise in the flutter of her
own as on the occasion of the beautiful act she indulged in at the very
moment, he was afterward to recognise, of their sweeping into her great
smooth empty, costly street -- a desert, at that hour, of lavish
lamplight and sculptured stone. She raised to her lips the hand she had
never yet released and kept it there a moment pressed close [40] against
them; he himself closing his eyes to the deepest detachment he was
capable of while he took in with a smothered sound of pain that this was
the conferred bounty by which Amy Evans sought most expressively to
encourage, to sustain and to reward. The motor had slackened and in a
moment would stop; and meanwhile even after lowering his hand again she
hadn't let it go. This enabled it, while he after a further moment
roused himself to a more confessed consciousness, to form with his
friend's a more active relation, to possess him of hers, in turn, and
with an intention the straighter that her glove had by this time somehow
come off. Bending over it without hindrance, he returned as firmly and
fully as the application of all his recovered wholeness of feeling,
under his moustache, might express, the consecration the bareness of his
own knuckles had received; only after which it was that, still thus
drawing out his grasp of her, and having let down their front glass by
his free hand, he signified to the footman his view of their stopping
short.
  They had arrived; the high, closed _porte-coch`ere_, in its crested
stretch of wall, awaited their approach; but his gesture took effect,
the car pulled up at the edge of the pavement, the man, in an instant,
was at the door and had opened it; quickly moving across the walk, the
next moment, to press the bell at the gate. Berridge, as his hand now
broke away, felt he had cut his cable; with which, after he had [41]
stepped out, he raised again the glass he had lowered and closed, its
own being already down, the door that had released him. During these
motions he had the sense of his companion, still radiant and splendid,
but somehow momentarily suppressed, suspended, silvered over and
celestially blurred, even as a summer moon by the loose veil of a cloud.
So it was he saw her while he leaned for farewell on the open
window-ledge; he took her in as her visible intensity of bright
vagueness filled the circle that the interior of the car made for her.
It was such a state as she would have been reduced to -- he felt this,
was certain of it -- for the first time in her life; and it was he, poor
John Berridge, after all, who would have created the condition.
  "Good-night, Princess. I shan't see you again."
  Vague was indeed no word for it -- shine though she might, in her
screened narrow niche, as with the liquefaction of her pearls, the
glimmer of her tears, the freshness of her surprise. "You won't come in
-- when you've had no supper?"
  He smiled at her with a purpose of kindness that could never in his
life have been greater; and at first but smiled without a word. He
presently shook his head, however -- doubtless also with as great a
sadness. "I seem to have supped to my fill, Princess. Thank you, I won't
come in."
  It drew from her, while she looked at him, a long, [42] low, anxious
wail. "And you won't do my Preface?"
  "No, Princess, I won't do your Preface. Nothing would induce me to say
a word in print about you. I'm in fact not sure I shall ever mention you
in any manner at all as long as ever I live."
  He had felt for an instant as if he were speaking to some miraculously
humanised idol, all sacred, all jewelled, all votively hung about, but
made mysterious, in the recess of its shrine, by the very thickness of
the accumulated lustre. And "Then you don't like me---?" was the
marvellous sound from the image.
  "Princess," was in response the sound of the worshipper, "Princess, I
adore you. But I'm ashamed for you."
  "Ashamed---?"
  "You _are_ Romance -- as everything, and by what I make out every one,
about you is; so what more do you want? Your Preface -- the only one
worth speaking of -- was written long ages ago by the most beautiful
imagination of man."
  Humanised at least for these moments, she could understand enough to
declare that she didn't. "I don't, I don't!"
  "You don't need to understand. Don't attempt such base things. Leave
those to us. Only live. Only be. _We'll_ do the rest."
  She moved over -- she had come close to the window. "Ah, but, Mr
Berridge---!" [43]
  He raised both hands; he shook them at her gently, in deep and soft
deprecation. "Don't sound my dreadful name. Fortunately, however, you
can't help yourself"
  "Ah, _voyons_! I so want---!"
  He repeated his gesture, and when he brought down his hands they
closed together on both of hers, which now quite convulsively grasped
the window-ledge. "Don't speak, because when you speak you really say
things---! You _are_ Romance," he pronounced afresh and with the last
intensity of conviction and persuasion. "That's all you have to do with
it," he continued while his hands, for emphasis, pressed hard on her
own.
  Their faces, in this way, were nearer together than ever, but with the
effect of only adding to the vividness of that dire non-intelligence
from which, all perversely and incalculably, her very beauty now
appeared to gain relief. This made for him a pang and almost an anguish;
the fear of her saying something yet again that would wretchedly prove
how little he moved her perception. So his eyes, of remonstrant, of
suppliant intention, met hers close, at the same time that these, so far
from shrinking, but with their quite other swimming plea all bedimmed
now, seemed almost to wash him with the tears of her failure. He
soothed, he stroked, he reassured her hands, for tender conveyance of
his meaning, quite as she had just before dealt with [44] his own for
brave demonstration of hers. It was during these instants as if the
question had been which of them _could_ most candidly and fraternally
plead. Full but of that she kept it up. "Ah, if you'd only think, if
you'd only try---!"
  He couldn't stand it -- she was capable of believing he had edged
away, excusing himself and trumping up a factitious theory, because he
hadn't the wit, hadn't the hand, to knock off the few pleasant pages she
asked him for and that any proper Frenchman, master of the _m'etier_,
would so easily and gallantly have promised. Should she so begin to
commit herself he'd, by the immortal gods, anticipate it in the manner
most admirably effective -- in fact he'd even thus make her further
derogation impossible. Their faces were so close that he could practise
any rich freedom -- even though for an instant, while the back of the
chauffeur guarded them on that side and his own presented breadth,
amplified by his loose mantle, filled the whole window-space, leaving
him no observation from any quarter to heed, he uttered, in a deep-drawn
final groan, an irrepressible echo of his pang for what might have been,
the muffled cry of his insistence. "You _are_ Romance!" -- he drove it
intimately, inordinately home, his lips, for a long moment, sealing it,
with the fullest force of authority, on her own; after which, as he
broke away and the car, starting again, turned powerfully across the
pavement, he had no further sound from her than if, all divinely
indulgent but all humanly [45] defeated, she had given the question up,
falling back to infinite wonder. He too fell back, but could still wave
his hat for her as she passed to disappearance in the great
floridly-framed aperture whose wings at once came together behind her.
