I note it as a wonderful case of its kind -- the finest of all
perhaps, in fact, that I have ever chanced to encounter. The kind,
moreover, is the greatest kind, the roll recruited, for our high esteem
and emulation, from history and fiction, legend and song. In the way of
service and sacrifice for love I've really known nothing go beyond it.
However, you can judge. My own sense of it happens just now to be
remarkably rounded off by the sequel -- more or less looked for on her
part -- of the legal step taken by Mrs Brivet. I hear from America that,
a decent interval being held to have elapsed since her gain of her
divorce, she is about to marry again -- an event that will, it would
seem, put an end to any question of the disclosure of the real story.
It's this that's the real story, or will be, with nothing wanting, as
soon as I shall have heard that her husband (who, on his side, has only
been waiting for her to move first) has sanctified his union with Mrs
Cavenham.


                          -=-=-  1  -=-=-

  She was, of course, often in and out, Mrs Cavenham, three years ago,
when I was painting her portrait; and the more so that I found her, I
remember, one of those comparatively rare sitters who present themselves
at odd hours, turn up without an appointment. The thing is to get most
women to keep those they do make; but she used to pop in, as she called
it, on the chance, letting me know that if I had a moment free she was
quite at my service. When I hadn't the moment free she liked to stay to
chatter, and she more than once expressed to me, I recollect, her theory
that an artist really, for the time, could never see too much of his
model. I must have shown her rather frankly that I understood her as
meaning that a model could never see too much of her artist. I
understood in fact everything, and especially that she was, in Brivet's
absence, so unoccupied and restless that she didn't know what to do with
herself. I was conscious in short that it was he who would pay [69] for
the picture, and that gives, I think, the measure of my enlightenment.
If I took such pains and bore so with her folly, it was fundamentally
for Brivet.
  I was often at that time, as I had often been before, occupied -- for
various 'subjects' -- with Mrs Dundene, in connection with which a
certain occasion comes back to me as the first slide in the lantern. If
I had invented my story I couldn't have made it begin better than with
Mrs Cavenham's irruption during the presence one morning of that lady.
My door, by some chance, had been unguarded, and she was upon us without
a warning. This was the sort of thing my model hated -- the one, I mean,
who, after all, sat mainly to oblige; but I remember how well she
behaved. She was not dressed for company, though indeed a dress was
never strictly necessary to her best effect. I recall that I had a
moment of uncertainty, but I must have dropped the name of each for the
other, as it was Mrs Cavenham's line always, later on, that I had made
them acquainted; and inevitably, though I wished her not to stay and got
rid of her as soon as possible, the two women, of such different places
in the scale, but of such almost equal beauty, were face to face for
some minutes, of which I was not even at the moment unaware that they
made an extraordinary use for mutual inspection. It was sufficient; they
from that instant knew each other.
  "Isn't she lovely?" I remember asking -- and quite without the spirit
of mischief -- when I came back from restoring my visitor to her cab.
  "Yes, awfully pretty. But I hate her."
  "Oh," I laughed, "she's not so bad as that."
  "Not so handsome as I, you mean?" And my sitter protested. "It isn't
fair of you to speak as if I were one of those who can't bear even at
the worst -- or the best -- another woman's looks. I should hate her
even if she were ugly."
  "But what have you to do with her?"
  She hesitated; then with characteristic looseness: "What have I to do
with anyone?"
  "Well, there's no one else I know of that you do hate."
  "That shows," she replied, "how good a reason there must be, even if I
don't know it yet."
  She knew it in the course of time, but I have never seen a reason, I
must say, operate so little for relief. As a history of the hatred of
Alice Dundene my anecdote becomes wondrous indeed. Meanwhile, at any
rate, I had Mrs Cavenham again with me for her regular sitting, and
quite as curious [70] as I had expected her to be about the person of
the previous time.
  "Do you mean she isn't, so to speak, a lady?" she asked after I had,
for reasons of my own, fenced a little. "Then if she's not
'professional' either, what is she?"
  "Well," I returned as I got at work, "she escapes, to my mind, any
classification save as one of the most beautiful and good-natured of
women."
  "I see her beauty," Mrs Cavenham said. "It's immense. Do you mean that
her good-nature's as great?"
  I had to think a little. "On the whole, yes.
  "Then I understand. That represents a greater quantity than _I_, I
think, should ever have occasion for."
  "Oh, the great thing's to be sure to have enough," I growled.
  But she laughed it off. "Enough, certainly, is as good as a feast!"
  It was -- I forget how long, some months -- after this that Frank
Brivet, whom I had not seen for two years, knocked again at my door. I
didn't at all object to him at my other work as I did to Mrs Cavenham,
but it was not till he had been in and out several times that Alice --
which is what most people still really call her -- chanced to see him
and received in such an extraordinary way the impression that was to be
of such advantage to him. She had been obliged to leave me that day
before he went -- though he stayed but a few minutes later; and it was
not till the next time we were alone together that I was struck with her
sudden interest, which became frankly pressing. I had met her, to begin
with, expansively enough.
  "An American? But what _sort_ -- don't you know? There are so many."
  I didn't mean it as an offence, but in the matter of men, and though
her acquaintance with them is so large, I always simplify with her.
"_The_ sort. He's rich."
  "And how rich?"
  "Why, _as_ an American. Disgustingly."
  I told her on this occasion more about him, but it was on that fact, I
remember, that, after a short silence, she brought out with a sigh:
"Well, I'm sorry. I should have liked to love him for himself"

[71]
                          -=-=-  2  -=-=-

  Quite apart from having been at school with him, I'm conscious --
though at times he so puts me out -- that I've a taste for Frank Brivet.
I'm quite aware, by the same token -- and even if when a man's so rich
it's difficult to tell -- that he's not everyone's affinity. I was
struck, at all events, from the first of the affair, with the way he
clung to me and seemed inclined to haunt my studio. He's fond of art,
though he has some awful pictures, and more or less understands mine;
but it wasn't this that brought him. Accustomed as I was to notice what
his wealth everywhere does for him, I was rather struck with his being
so much thrown upon me and not giving London -- the big fish that rises
so to the hook baited with gold -- more of a chance to perform to him. I
very soon, however, understood. He had his reasons for wishing not to be
seen much with Mrs Cavenham, and, as he was in love with her, felt the
want of some machinery for keeping temporarily away from her. I was his
machinery, and, when once I perceived this, was willing enough to turn
his wheel. His situation, moreover, became interesting from the moment I
fairly grasped it, which he soon enabled me to do. His old reserve on
the subject of Mrs Brivet went to the winds, and it's not my fault if I
let him see how little I was shocked by his confidence. His marriage had
originally seemed to me to require much more explanation than anyone
could give, and indeed in the matter of women in general, I confess,
I've never seized his point of view. His inclinations are strange, and
strange, too, perhaps, his indifferences. Still, I can enter into some
of his aversions, and I agreed with him that his wife was odious.
  "She has hitherto, since we began practically to live apart," he said,
"mortally hated the idea of doing anything so pleasant for me as to
divorce me. But I've reason to believe she has now changed her mind.
She'd like to get clear."
  I waited a moment. "For a man?"
  "Oh, such a jolly good one! Remson Sturch."
  I wondered. "Do you call _him_ good?"
  "Good for _her_. If she only can be got to be -- which it oughtn't to
be difficult to make her -- fool enough to marry him, he'll give her the
real size of his foot, and I shall be avenged in a manner positively
ideal."
  "Then will she institute proceedings?"
  "She can't, as things stand. She has nothing to go upon. I've been,"
said poor Brivet, "I positively have, so blameless." [72] I thought of
Mrs Cavenham, and, though I said nothing, he went on after an instant as
if he knew it. "They can't put a finger. I've been so d---d particular."
  I hesitated. "And your idea is now not to be particular any more?"
  "Oh, about _her_," he eagerly replied, "always!" On which I laughed
out and he coloured. "But my idea is nevertheless, at present," he went
on, "to pave the way; that is, I mean, if I can keep the person you're
thinking of so totally out of it that not a breath in the whole business
can possibly touch her."
  "I see," I reflected. "She isn't willing?"
  He stared. "To be compromised? Why the devil _should_ she be?"
  "Why shouldn't she -- for _you_? Doesn't she love you?"
  "Yes, and it's because she does, dearly, that I don't feel the right
way to repay her is by spattering her over."
  "Yet if she stands," I argued, "straight in the splash---!"
  "She doesn't!" he interrupted me, with some curtness. "She stands a
thousand miles out of it; she stands on a pinnacle; she stands as she
stands in your charming portrait -- lovely, lonely, untouched. And so
she must remain."
  "It's beautiful, it's doubtless inevitable," I returned after a
little, "that you should feel so. Only, if your wife doesn't divorce you
for a woman you love, I don't quite see how she can do it for the woman
you don't."
  "Nothing is more simple," he declared; on which I saw he had figured
it out rather more than I thought. "It will he quite enough if she
_believes_ I love her."
  "If the lady in question does -- or Mrs Brivet?"
  "Mrs Brivet -- confound her! If she believes I love somebody else. I
must have the appearance, and the appearance must of course be complete.
All I've got to do is to take up---"
  "To take up---?" I asked, as he paused.
  "Well, publicly, with someone or other; someone who could easily be
squared. One would undertake, after all, to produce the impression."
  "On your wife naturally, you mean?"
  "On my wife, and on the person concerned."
  I turned it over and did justice to his ingenuity. "But what
impression would you undertake to produce on---?"
  "Well?" he inquired as I just faltered.
  "On the person _not_ concerned. How would the lady you just accused me
of having in mind be affected toward such a proceeding?" [73]
  He had to think a little, but he thought with success. "Oh, I'd answer
for her."
  "To the other lady?" I laughed.
  He remained quite grave. "To myself. She'd leave us alone. As it would
be for her good, she'd understand."
  I was sorry for him, but he struck me as artless. "Understand, in that
interest, the 'spattering' of another person?"
  He coloured again, but he was sturdy. "It must of course be exactly
the right person -- a special type. Someone who, in the first place," he
explained, "wouldn't mind, and of whom, in the second, she wouldn't be
jealous."
  I followed perfectly, but it struck me as important all round that we
should be clear. "But wouldn't the danger be great that any woman who
shouldn't have that effect -- the effect of jealousy -- upon her
wouldn't have it either on your wife?"
  "Ah," he acutely returned, "my wife wouldn't he warned. She wouldn't
be 'in the know'."
  "I see." I quite caught up. "The two other ladies distinctly would."
  But he seemed for an instant at a loss. "Wouldn't it be indispensable
only as regards one?"
  "Then the other would he simply sacrificed?"
  "She would be," Brivet splendidly put it, "remunerated."
  I was pleased even with the sense of financial power betrayed by the
way he said it, and I at any rate so took the measure of his intention
of generosity and his characteristically big view of the matter that
this quickly suggested to me what at least might be his exposure. "But
suppose that, in spite of 'remuneration', this secondary personage
should perversely like you? She would have to be indeed, as you say, a
special type, but even special types may have general feelings. Suppose
she should like you too much."
  It had pulled him up a little. 'What do you mean by 'too much'?"
  "Well, more than enough to leave the case quite as simple as you'd
require it."
  "Oh, money always simplifies. Besides, I should make a point of being
a brute." And on my laughing at this: "I should pay her enough to keep
her down, to make her easy. But the thing," he went on with a drop back
to the less mitigated real -- "the thing, hang it! is first to find
her."
  "Surely," I concurred; "for she should have to lack, you see, no
requirement whatever for plausibility. She must be, for [74] instance,
not only 'squareable', but -- before anything else even -- awfully
handsome."
  "Oh, 'awfully'!" He could make light of _that_, which was what Mrs
Cavenham was.
  "It wouldn't do for her, at all events," I maintained, "to be a bit
less attractive than---"
  "Well, than who?" he broke in, not only with a comic effect of
disputing my point, but also as if he knew whom I was thinking of.
  Before I could answer him, however, the door opened, and we were
interrupted by a visitor -- a visitor who, on the spot, in a flash,
primed me with a reply. But I had of course for the moment to keep it to
myself. 'Than Mrs Dundene!' 


                          -=-=-  3  -=-=-

  I had nothing more than that to do with it, but before I could turn
round it was done; by which I mean that Brivet, whose previous
impression of her had, for some sufficient reason, failed of sharpness,
now jumped straight to the perception that here to his hand for the
solution of his problem was the missing quantity and the appointed aid.
They were in presence on this occasion, for the first time, half an
hour, during which he sufficiently showed me that he felt himself to
have found the special type. He was certainly to that extent right that
nobody could -- in those days in particular -- without a rapid sense
that she was indeed 'special', spend any such time in the company of our
extraordinary friend. I couldn't quarrel with his recognising so quickly
what I had myself instantly recognised, yet if it did in truth appear
almost at a glance that she would, through the particular facts of
situation, history, aspect, tone, temper, beautifully 'do', I felt from
the first so affected by the business that I desired to wash my hands of
it. There was something I wished to say to him before it went further,
but after that I cared only to be out of it. I may as well say at once,
however, that I never _was_ out of it; for a man habitually ridden by
the twin demons of imagination and observation is never -- enough for
his peace -- out of anything. But I wanted to be able to apply to
either, should anything happen, " 'Thou canst not say _I_ did it!'" What
might in particular happen was represented by what I said to Brivet the
first time he gave me a chance. It was what I had wished before the
affair went further, but it had then already gone so far that he had
been twice -- as he immediately let me know -- to see her at home. He
clearly desired me to keep up with him, which I was eager to [75]
declare impossible; but he came again to see me only after he had
called. Then I instantly made my point, which was that she was really,
hang it! too good for his fell purpose.
  "But, my dear man, my purpose is a sacred one. And if, moreover, she
herself doesn't think she's too good---"
  "Ah," said I, "she's in love with you, and so it isn't fair."
  He wondered. "Fair to _me_?"
  "Oh, I don't care a button for you! What I'm thinking of is her risk."
  "And what do you mean by her risk?"
  "Why, her finding, of course, before you've done with her, that she
can't do without you."
  He met me as if he had quite thought of that. "Isn't it much more _my_
risk?"
   "Ah, but you take it deliberately, walk into it with your eyes open.
What I want to be sure of, liking her as I do, is that she fully
understands."
  He had been moving about my place with his hands in his pockets, and
at this he stopped short. "How much do you like her?"
  "Oh, ten times more than she likes me; so _that_ needn't trouble you.
Does she understand that it can be only to help somebody else?"
  "Why, my dear chap, she's as sharp as a steam-whistle."
  "So that she also already knows who the other person is?"
  He took a turn again, then brought out, "There's no other person for
her but me. Of course, as yet, there are things one doesn't say; I
haven't set straight to work to dot all my _i_'s, and the beauty of her,
as she's really charming -- and would be charming in _any_ relation --
is just exactly that I don't expect to have to. We'll work it out all
right, I think, so that what I most wanted just to make sure of from you
was what you've been good enough to tell me. I mean that you don't
object -- for yourself."
  I could with philosophic mirth allay that scruple, but what I couldn't
do was to let him see what really most worried me. It stuck, as they
say, in my crop that a woman like -- yes, when all was said and done --
Alice Dundene should simply minister to the convenience of a woman like
Rose Cavenham. "But there's one thing more." This was as far as I could
go. "I may take from you then that she not only knows it's for your
divorce and remarriage, but can fit the shoe on the very person?"
  He waited a moment. "Well, you may take from me that I find her no
more of a fool than, as I seem to see, many other fellows have found
her." [76]
  I too was silent a little, but with a superior sense of being able to
think it all out further than he. "She's magnificent!"
  "Well, so am I!" said Brivet. And for months afterward there was much
-- in fact everything -- in the whole picture to justify his claim. I
remember how it struck me as a lively sign of this that Mrs Cavenham, at
an early day, gave up her pretty house in Wilton Street and withdrew for
a time to America. That was palpable design and diplomacy, but I'm
afraid that I quite as much, and doubtless very vulgarly, read into it
that she had had money from Brivet to go. I even promised myself, I
confess, the entertainment of finally making out that, whether or no the
marriage should come off, she would not have been the person to find the
episode least lucrative.
  She left the others, at all events, completely together, and so, as
the plot, with this, might be said definitely to thicken, it came to me
in all sorts of ways that the curtain had gone up on the drama. It came
to me, I hasten to add, much less from the two actors themselves than
from other quarters -- the usual sources, which never fail, of chatter;
for after my friends' direction was fairly taken they had the good taste
on either side to handle it, in talk, with gloves, not to expose it to
what I should have called the danger of definition. I even seemed to
divine that, allowing for needful preliminaries, they dealt even with
each other on this same unformulated plane, and that it well might be
that no relation in London at that moment, between a remarkable man and
a beautiful woman, had more of the general air of good manners. I saw
for a long time, directly, but little of them, for they were naturally
much taken up, and Mrs Dundene in particular intermitted, as she had
never yet done in any complication of her chequered career, her calls at
my studio. As the months went by I couldn't but feel -- partly, perhaps,
for this very reason -- that their undertaking announced itself as
likely not to fall short of its aim. I gathered from the voices of the
air that nothing whatever was neglected that could make it a success,
and just this vision it was that made me privately project wonders into
it, caused anxiety and curiosity often again to revisit me, and led me
in fine to say to myself that so rich an effect could be arrived at on
either side only by a great deal of heroism. As the omens markedly
developed I supposed the heroism had likewise done so, and that the
march of the matter was logical I inferred from the fact that even
though the ordeal, all round, was more protracted than might have been
feared, Mrs Cavenham made no fresh appearance. This I took as a sign
that she knew she was safe -- took indeed as the feature not the least
striking of [77] the situation constituted in her interest. I held my
tongue, naturally, about her interest, but I watched it from a distance
with an attention that, had I been caught in the act, might have led to
a mistake about the direction of my sympathy. I had to make it my proper
secret that, while I lost as little as possible of what was being done
for her, I felt more and more that I myself could never have begun to do
it. 


                          -=-=-  4  -=-=-

  She came back at last, however, and one of the first things she did on
her arrival was to knock at my door and let me know immediately, to
smooth the way, that she was there on particular business. I was not to
be surprised -- though even if I were she shouldn't mind -- to hear that
she wished to bespeak from me, on the smallest possible delay, a
portrait, full-length for preference, of our delightful friend Mr
Brivet. She brought this out with a light perfection of assurance of
which the first effect -- I couldn't help it -- was to make me show
myself almost too much amused for good manners. She first stared at my
laughter, then wonderfully joined in it, looking meanwhile
extraordinarily pretty and elegant -- more completely handsome in fact,
as well as more completely happy, than I had ever yet seen her. She was
distinctly the better, I quickly saw, for what was being done for her,
and it was an odd spectacle indeed that while, out of her sight and to
the exclusion of her very name, the good work went on, it put roses in
her cheeks and rings on her fingers and the sense of success in her
heart. What had made me laugh, at all events, was the number of other
ideas suddenly evoked by her request, two of which, the next moment, had
disengaged themselves with particular brightness. She wanted, for all
her confidence, to omit no precaution, to close up every issue, and she
had acutely conceived that the possession of Brivet's picture --
full-length, above all! -- would constitute for her the strongest
possible appearance of holding his supreme pledge. If that had been her
foremost thought her second then had been that if I should paint him he
would have to sit, and that in order to sit he would have to return. He
had been at this time, as I knew, for many weeks in foreign cities --
which helped moreover to explain to me that Mrs Cavenham had thought it
compatible with her safety to reopen her London house. Everything
accordingly seemed to make for a victory, but there _was_ such a thing,
her proceeding implied, as one's -- at least as _her_ -- susceptibility
and her nerves. This question of his return I [78] of course immediately
put to her; on which she immediately answered that it was expressed in
her very proposal, inasmuch as this proposal was nothing but the offer
that Brivet had himself made her. The thing was to be his gift; she had
only, he had assured her, to choose her artist and arrange the time; and
she had amiably chosen me -- chosen me for the dates, as she called
them, immediately before us. I doubtless -- but I don't care -- give the
measure of my native cynicism in confessing that I didn't the least
avoid showing her that I saw through her game. "Well, I'll do him," I
said, "if he'll come himself and ask me."
  She wanted to know, at this, of course, if I impugned her veracity.
"You don't believe what I tell you? You're afraid for your money?"
  I took it in high good-humour. "For my money not a bit."
  "For what then?"
  I had to think first how much I could say, which seemed to me,
naturally, as yet but little. "I know perfectly that whatever happens
Brivet always pays. But let him come; then we'll talk."
  "Ah, well," she returned, "you'll see if he doesn't come." And come he
did in fact -- though without a word from myself directly -- at the end
of ten days; on which we immediately got to work, an idea highly
favourable to it having meanwhile shaped itself in my own breast.
Meanwhile too, however, before his arrival, Mrs Cavenham had been again
to see me, and this it was precisely, I think, that determined my idea.
My present explanation of what afresh passed between us is that she
really felt the need to build up her security a little higher by
borrowing from my own vision of what had been happening. I had not, she
saw, been very near to that, but I had been at least, during her time in
America, nearer than she. And I had doubtless somehow 'aggravated' her
by appearing to disbelieve in the guarantee she had come in such pride
to parade to me. It had in any case befallen that, on the occasion of
her second visit, what I least expected or desired -- her avowal of
being 'in the know' -- suddenly went too far to stop. When she did speak
she spoke with elation. "Mrs Brivet has filed her petition."
  "For getting rid of him?"
  "Yes, in order to marry again; which is exactly what he wants her to
do. It's wonderful -- and, in a manner, I think, quite splendid -- the
way he has made it easy for her. He has met her wishes handsomely --
obliged her in every particular."
  As she preferred, subtly enough, to put it all as if it were for [79]
the sole benefit of his wife, I was quite ready for this tone; but I
privately defied her to keep it up. "Well, then, he hasn't laboured in
vain."
  "Oh, it _couldn't_ have been in vain. What has happened has been the
sort of thing that she couldn't possibly fail to act upon."
  "Too great a scandal, eh?"
  She but just paused at it. "Nothing neglected, certainly, or omitted.
He was not the man to undertake it---"
  "And not put it through? No, I should say he wasn't the man. In any
case he apparently hasn't been. But he must have found the job---"
  "Rather a bore?" she asked as I had hesitated.
  "Well, not so much a bore as a delicate matter."
  She seemed to demur. "Delicate?"
  "Why, your sex likes him so."
  "But isn't just that what has made it easy?"
  "Easy for _him_ -- yes," I after a moment admitted.
  But it wasn't what she meant. "And not difficult, also, for _them_."
  This was the nearest approach I was to have heard her make, since the
day of the meeting of the two women at my studio, to naming Mrs Dundene.
She never, to the end of the affair, came any closer to her in speech
than by the collective and promiscuous plural pronoun. There might have
been a dozen of them, and she took cognizance, in respect to them, only
of quantity. It was as if it had been a way of showing how little of
anything else she imputed. Quality, as distinguished from quantity, was
what _she_ had. "Oh, I think," I said, "that we can scarcely speak for
them."
  "Why not? They must certainly have had the most beautiful time.
Operas, theatres, suppers, dinners, diamonds, carriages, journeys hither
and yon with him, poor dear, telegrams sent by each from everywhere to
everywhere and always lying about, elaborate arrivals and departures at
stations for everyone to see, and, in fact, quite a crowd usually
collected -- as many witnesses as you like. Then," she wound up, "his
brougham standing always -- half the day and half the night -- at their
doors. He has had to keep a brougham, and the proper sort of man, just
for that alone. In other words unlimited publicity."
  "I see. What more can they have wanted? Yes," I pondered, "they like,
for the most part, we suppose, a studied, outrageous _affichage_, and
they must have thoroughly enjoyed it."
  "Ah, but it was only that."
  I wondered. "Only what? [80]
  "Only _affich'e_. Only outrageous. Only the _form_ of -- well, of what
would definitely serve. He never saw them alone."
  I wondered -- or at least appeared to -- still more. "Never?"
  "Never. Never once." She had a wonderful air of answering for it. "I
know."
  I saw that, after all, she really believed she knew, and I had indeed,
for that matter, to recognise that I myself believed her knowledge to be
sound. Only there went with it a complacency, an enjoyment of having
really made me see what could be done for her, so little to my taste
that for a minute or two I could scarce trust myself to speak: she
looked somehow, as she sat there, so lovely, and yet, in spite of her
loveliness -- or perhaps even just because of it -- so smugly selfish;
she put it to me with so small a consciousness of anything but her
personal triumph that, while she had kept her skirts clear, her name
unuttered and her reputation untouched, 'they' had been in it even more
than her success required. It was their skirts, their name and their
reputation that, in the proceedings at hand, would bear the brunt. It
was only after waiting a while that I could at last say: "You're
perfectly sure then of Mrs Brivet's intention?"
  "Oh, we've had formal notice."
  "And he's himself satisfied of the sufficiency---?"
  "Of the sufficiency---?"
  "Of what he has done."
  She rectified. "Of what he has _appeared_ to do."
  "That _is_ then enough?"
  "Enough," she laughed, "to send him to the gallows!" To which I could
only reply that all was well that ended well. 


                          -=-=-  5  -=-=-

  All for me, however, as it proved, had not ended yet. Brivet, as I
have mentioned, duly reappeared to sit for me, and Mrs Cavenham, on his
arrival, as consistently went abroad. He confirmed to me that lady's
news of how he had 'fetched', as he called it, his wife -- let me know,
as decently owing to me after what had passed, on the subject, between
us, that the forces set in motion had logically operated; but he made no
other allusion to his late accomplice -- for I now took for granted the
close of the connection -- than was conveyed in this intimation. He
spoke -- and the effect was almost droll -- as if he had had, since our
previous meeting, a busy and responsible year and wound up an affair (as
he was accustomed to wind up affairs) involving a mass of detail; he
even dropped into occasional reminiscence [81] of what he had seen and
enjoyed and disliked during a recent period of rather far-reaching
adventure; but he stopped just as short as Mrs Cavenham had done -- and,
indeed, much shorter than she -- of introducing Mrs Dundene by name into
our talk. And what was singular in this, I soon saw, was -- apart from a
general discretion -- that he abstained not at all because his mind was
troubled, but just because, on the contrary, it was so much at ease. It
was perhaps even more singular still, meanwhile, that, though I had
scarce been able to bear Mrs Cavenham's manner in this particular, I
found I could put up perfectly with that of her friend. She had annoyed
me, but he didn't -- I give the inconsistency for what it is worth. The
obvious state of his conscience had always been a strong point in him
and one that exactly irritated some people as much as it charmed others;
so that if, in general, it was positively, and in fact quite
aggressively approving, this monitor, it had never held its head so high
as at the juncture of which I speak. I took all this in with eagerness,
for I saw how it would play into my work. Seeking as I always do,
instinctively, to represent sitters in the light of the thing, whatever
it may be, that facially, least wittingly or responsibly, gives the
pitch of their aspect, I felt immediately that I should have the clue
for making a capital thing of Brivet were I to succeed in showing him in
just this freshness of his cheer. His cheer was that of his being able
to say to himself that he had got all he wanted precisely _as_ he
wanted: without having harmed a fly. He had arrived so neatly where most
men arrive besmirched, and what he seemed to cry out as he stood before
my canvas -- wishing everyone well all round -- was: "See how clever and
pleasant and practicable, how jolly and lucky and rich I've been!" I
determined, at all events, that I would make some such characteristic
words as these cross, at any cost, the footlights, as it were, of my
frame.
  Well, I can't but feel to this hour that I really hit my nail -- that
the man _is_ fairly painted in the light and that the work remains as
yet my high-water mark. He himself was delighted with it -- and all the
more, I think, that before it was finished he received from America the
news of his liberation. He had not defended the suit -- as to which
judgment, therefore, had been expeditiously rendered; and he was
accordingly free as air and with the added sweetness of every augmented
appearance that his wife was herself blindly preparing to seek
chastisement at the hands of destiny. There being at last no obstacle to
his open association with Mrs Cavenham, he called her directly back to
London to admire my achievement, over which, from the very [82] first
glance, she as amiably let herself go. It was the very view of him she
had desired to possess; it was the dear man in his intimate essence for
those who knew him; and for any one who should ever be deprived of him
it would be the next best thing to the sound of his voice. We of course
by no means lingered, however, on the contingency of privation, which
was promptly swept away in the rush of Mrs Cavenham's vision of how
straight also, above and beyond, I had, as she called it, attacked. I
couldn't quite myself, I fear, tell how straight, but Mrs Cavenham
perfectly could, and did, for everybody: she had at her fingers' ends
all the reasons why the thing would be a treasure even for those who had
never seen "Frank".
  I had finished the picture, but was, according to my practice, keeping
it near me a little, for afterthoughts, when I received from Mrs Dundene
the first visit she had paid me for many a month. "I've come," she
immediately said, "to ask you a favour"; and she turned her eyes, for a
minute, as if contentedly full of her thought, round the large workroom
she already knew so well and in which her beauty had really rendered
more services than could ever be repaid. There were studies of her yet
on the walls; there were others thrust away in corners; others still had
gone forth from where she stood and carried to far-away places the reach
of her lingering look. I had greatly, almost inconveniently missed her,
and I don't know why it was that she struck me now as more beautiful
than ever. She had always, for that matter, had a way of seeming each
time a little different and a little better. Dressed very simply in
black materials, feathers and lace, that gave the impression of being
light and fine, she had indeed the air of a special type, but quite as
some great lady might have had it. She looked like a princess in Court
mourning. Oh, she had been a case for the petitioner -- was everything
the other side wanted! "Mr Brivet," she went on to say, "has kindly
offered me a present. I'm to ask of him whatever in the world I most
desire."
  I knew in an instant, on this, what was coming, but I was at first
wholly taken up with the simplicity of her allusion to her late
connection. Had I supposed that, like Brivet, she wouldn't allude to it
at all? or had I stupidly assumed that if she did it would be with
ribaldry and rancour? I hardly know; I only know that I suddenly found
myself charmed to receive from her thus the key of my own freedom. There
was something I wanted to say to her, and she had thus given me leave.
But for the moment I only repeated as with amused interest: "Whatever in
the world---?" [83]
  "Whatever in all the world."
  "But that's immense, and in what way can poor _I_ help---?"
  "By painting him for me. I want a portrait of him."
  I looked at her a moment in silence. She was lovely. "That's what --
'in all the world' -- you've chosen?"
  "Yes -- thinking it over: full-length. I want it for remembrance, and
I want it as you will do it. It's the only thing I do want."
  "Nothing else?"
  "Oh, it's enough." I turned about -- she was wonderful. I had whisked
out of sight for a month the picture I had produced for Mrs Cavenham,
and it was now completely covered with a large piece of stuff. I stood
there a little, thinking of it, and she went on as if she feared I might
be unwilling. "_Can't_ you do it?"
  It showed me that she had not heard from him of my having painted him,
and this, further, was an indication that, his purpose effected, he had
ceased to see her. "I suppose you know," I presently said, "what you've
done for him?"
  "Oh yes; it was what I wanted."
  "It was what _he_ wanted!" I laughed.
  "Well, I want what he wants."
  "Even to his marrying Mrs Cavenham?"
  She hesitated. "As well her as anyone, from the moment he couldn't
marry _me_."
  "It was beautiful of you to be so sure of that," I returned.
  "How could I be anything else but sure? He doesn't so much as _know_
me!" said Alice Dundene.
  "No," I declared, "I verily believe he doesn't. There's your picture,"
I added, unveiling my work.
  She was amazed and delighted. "I may have _that_?"
  "So far as I'm concerned -- absolutely."
  "Then he had himself the beautiful thought of sitting for me?"
  I faltered but an instant. "Yes."
  Her pleasure in what I had done was a joy to me. "Why, it's of a
truth---! It's perfection."
  "I think it is."
  "It's the whole story. It's life."
  "That's what I tried for," I said; and I added to myself: "Why the
deuce _do_ we?"
  "It will be _him_ for me," she meanwhile went on. "I shall _live_ with
it, keep it all to myself, and -- do you know what it will do? -- it
will seem to make up."
  "To make up?" [84]
  "I never saw him alone," said Mrs Dundene.
  I am still keeping the thing to send to her, punctually, on the day
he's married; but I had of course, on my understanding with her, a
tremendous bout with Mrs Cavenham, who protested with indignation
against my 'base treachery' and made to Brivet an appeal for redress
which, enlightened, face to face with the magnificent humility of his
other friend's selection, he couldn't, for shame, entertain. All he was
able to do was to suggest to me that I might for one or other of the
ladies, at my choice, do him again; but I had no difficulty in replying
that my best was my best and that what was done was done. He assented
with the awkwardness of a man in dispute between women, and Mrs Cavenham
remained furious. "Can't 'they' -- of _all_ possible things, think! --
take something else?"
  "Oh, they want _him_!"
  "Him?" It was monstrous.
  "To live with," I explained -- "to make up."
  "To make up for what?"
  "Why, you know, they never saw him alone." 
