ROGER LAWRENCE had come to town for the express purpose of doing a
certain act, but as the hour for action approached he felt his ardor
rapidly ebbing away. Of the ardor that comes from hope, indeed, he had
felt little from the first; so little that as he whirled along in the
train he wondered to find himself engaged in this fool's errand. But in
default of hope he was sustained, I may almost say, by despair. He would
fail, he was sure, but he must fail again before he could rest.
Meanwhile he was restless enough. In the evening, at his hotel, having
roamed aimlessly about the streets for a couple of hours in the dark
December cold, he went up to his room and dressed, with a painful sense
of having but partly succeeded in giving himself the tournure of an
impassioned suitor. He was twenty-nine years old, sound and strong, with
a tender heart, and a genius, almost, for common sense; his face told
clearly of youth and kindness and sanity, but it had little other
beauty. His complexion was so fresh as to be almost absurd in a man of
his age, -- an effect rather enhanced by a precocious partial baldness.
Being extremely short-sighted, he went with his head thrust forward; but
as this infirmity is considered by persons who have studied the
picturesque to impart an air of distinction, he may have the benefit of
the possibility. His figure was compact and sturdy, and, on the whole,
his best point; although, owing to an incurable personal shyness, he had
a good deal of awkwardness of movement. He was fastidiously neat in his
person, and extremely precise and methodical in his habits, which were
of the sort supposed to mark a man for bachelorhood. The desire to get
the better of his diffidence had given him a somewhat ponderous
formalism of manner, which many persons found extremely amusing. He was
remarkable for the spotlessness of his linen, the high polish of his
boots, and the smoothness of his hat. He carried in all weathers a
peculiarly neat umbrella. He never smoked; he drank in moderation. His
voice, instead of being the robust barytone which his capacious chest
led you to expect, was a mild, deferential tenor. He was fond of going
early to bed, and was suspected of what is called "fussing" with his
health. No one had ever accused him of meanness, yet he passed
universally for a cunning economist. In trifling matters, such as the
choice of a shoemaker or a dentist, his word carried weight; but no one
dreamed of asking his opinion in politics or literature. Here and there,
nevertheless, an observer less superficial than the majority would have
whispered you that Roger was an under-valued man, and that in the long
run he would come out even with the best. "Have you ever studied his
face?" such an observer would say. Beneath its simple serenity, over
which his ruddy blushes seemed to pass like clouds in a summer sky,
there slumbered a fund of exquisite human expression. The eye was
excellent; small, perhaps, and somewhat dull, but with a certain
appealing depth, like the tender dumbness in the gaze of a dog. In
repose Lawrence may have looked stupid; but as he talked his face slowly
brightened by gradual fine degrees, until at the end of an hour it
inspired you with a confidence so perfect as to be in some degree a
tribute to its owner's intellect, as it certainly was to his integrity.
On this occasion Roger dressed himself with unusual care and with a
certain sober elegance. He debated for three minutes over two
cravats, and then, blushing in his mirror at his puerile vanity, he
replaced the plain black tie in which he had travelled. When he had
finished dressing, it was still too early to go forth on his errand. He
went into the reading-room of the hotel, but here there soon appeared
two smokers. Wishing not to be infected by their fumes, he crossed over
to the great empty drawing-room, sat down, and beguiled his impatience
with trying on a pair of lavender gloves.

While he was thus engaged there came into the room a person who
attracted his attention by the singularity of his conduct. This was a
man of less than middle age, good-looking, pale, with a rather
pretentious blond mustache, and various shabby remnants of finery. His
face was haggard, his whole aspect was that of grim and hopeless misery.
He walked straight to the table in the centre of the room, and poured
out and drank without stopping three full glasses of ice-water, as if he
were striving to quench the fury of some inner fever. He then went to
the window, leaned his forehead against the cold pane, and drummed a
nervous tattoo with his long stiff finger-nails. Finally he strode over
to the fireplace, flung himself into a chair, leaned forward with his
head in his hands, and groaned audibly. Lawrence, as he smoothed down
his lavender gloves, watched him and reflected: "What an image of fallen
prosperity, of degradation and despair! I have been fancying myself in
trouble; I have been dejected, doubtful, anxious. I'm hopeless. But what
is my sentimental sorrow to this?" The unhappy gentleman rose from his
chair, turned his back to the chimney-piece, and stood with folded arms
gazing at Lawrence, who was seated opposite to him. The young man
sustained his glance, but with sensible discomfort. His face was as
white as ashes, his eyes were as lurid as coals. Roger had never seen
anything so tragic as the two long harsh lines which descended from his
nose beside his mouth, showing almost black on his chalky skin, and
seeming to satirize the silly drooping ends of his fair relaxed
mustache. Lawrence felt that his companion was going to address him; he
began to draw off his gloves. The stranger suddenly came towards him,
stopped a moment, eyed him again with insolent intensity, and then
seated himself on the sofa beside him. His first movement was to seize
the young man's arm. "He's simply crazy!" thought Lawrence. Roger was
now able to appreciate the pathetic disrepair of his appearance. His
open waistcoat displayed a soiled and crumpled shirt-bosom, from whose
empty button-holes the studs had recently been wrenched. In his normal
freshness the man must have looked like a gambler with a run of luck. He
spoke in a rapid, excited tone, with a hard, petulant voice.

"You'll think me crazy, I suppose. Well, I shall be soon. Will you lend
me a hundred dollars?"

"Who are you? What's your trouble?" Roger asked.

"My name would tell you nothing. I'm a stranger here. My trouble, -- it's
a long story! But it's grievous, I assure you. It's pressing upon me
with a fierceness that grows while I sit here talking to you. A hundred
dollars would stave it off, -- a few days at least. Don't refuse me!"
These last words were uttered half as an entreaty, half as a threat.
"Don't say you haven't got them, -- a man that wears gloves like that!
Come! you look like a good fellow. Look at me! I'm a good fellow, too! I
don't need to swear to my being in distress. "

Lawrence was moved, disgusted, and irritated. The man's distress was
real enough, but there was something flagrantly dissolute and unsavory
in his expression and tone. Roger declined to entertain his request
without learning more about him. From the stranger's persistent
reluctance to do more than simply declare that he was from St. Louis,
and repeat that he was in trouble, in hideous, overwhelming trouble,
Lawrence was led to believe that he had been dabbling in crime. The
 more he insisted upon some definite statement of his
circumstances, the more fierce and peremptory became the other's
petition. Lawrence was before all things deliberate and perspicacious,
the last man in the world to be hustled or bullied. It was quite out of
his nature to do a thing without distinctly knowing why. He of course
had no imagination, which, as we know, should always stand at the right
hand of charity; but he had good store of that wholesome discretion
whose place is at the left. Discretion told him that his companion was a
dissolute scoundrel, who had sinned through grievous temptation,
perhaps, but who had certainly sinned. His perfect misery was
incontestable. Roger felt that he could not cancel his misery without in
some degree sanctioning his vices. It was not in his power, at any rate,
to present him, out of hand, a hundred dollars. He compromised. "I can't
think of giving you the sum you ask," he said. "I have no time,
moreover, to investigate your case at present. If you will meet me here
to-morrow morning, I will listen to anything more you may have made up
your mind to say. Meanwhile, here are ten dollars."

The man looked at the proffered note and made no movement to accept it.
Then raising his eyes to Roger's face, -- eyes streaming with tears of
helpless rage and baffled want: "O, the devil!" he cried. "What can I do
with ten dollars? Damn it, I don't know how to beg. Listen to me! If you
don't give me what I ask, I shall cut my throat! Think of that! on your
head be the penalty!"

Lawrence repocketed his note and rose to his feet. "No, decidedly," he
said, "you don't know how to beg!" A moment after, he had left the hotel
and was walking rapidly toward a well-remembered dwelling. He was
shocked and discomposed by this brutal collision with want and vice;
but, as he walked, the cool night air restored the healthy tone of his
sensibilities. The image of his heated petitioner was speedily replaced
by the calmer figure of Isabel Morton.

He had come to know her three years before, through a visit she had then
made to one of his neighbors in the country. In spite of his unventurous
tastes and the even tenor of his habits, Lawrence was by no means
lacking, as regards life, in what the French call les grandes
curiosites; but from an early age his curiosity had chiefly taken the
form of a timid but strenuous desire to fathom the depths of matrimony.
He had dreamed of this gentle bondage as other men dream of the "free
unhoused condition" of celibacy. He had been born a marrying man, with a
conscious desire for progeny. The world in this respect had not done him
justice. It had supposed him to be wrapped up in his petty comforts;
whereas, in fact, he was serving a devout apprenticeship to the
profession of husband and father. Feeling at twenty-six that he had
something to offer a woman, he allowed himself to become interested in
Miss Morton. It was rather odd that a man of tremors and blushes should
in this line have been signally bold; for Miss Morton had the reputation
of being extremely fastidious, and was supposed to wear some dozen
broken hearts on her girdle, as an Indian wears the scalps of his enemies.

It is said that, as a rule, men fall in love with their opposites;
certainly Lawrence complied with the rule. He was the most unobtrusively
natural of men; she, on the other hand, was preeminently artificial. She
was pretty, but not really so pretty as she seemed; clever, but not
intelligent; amiable, but not generous. She possessed in perfection the
manner of society, which she lavished with indiscriminate grace on the
just and the unjust, and which very effectively rounded and completed
the somewhat meagre outline of her personal character. In reality, Miss
Morton was keenly ambitious. A woman of simpler needs, she might very
well have accepted our hero. He offered himself with urgent and
obstinate  warmth. She esteemed him more than any man she had
known, -- so she told him; but she added that the man she married must
satisfy her heart. Her heart, she did not add, was bent upon a carriage
and diamonds.

From the point of view of ambition, a match with Roger Lawrence was not
worth discussing. He was therefore dismissed with gracious but
inexorable firmness. From this moment the young man's sentiment hardened
into a passion. Six months later he heard that Miss Morton was preparing
to go to Europe. He sought her out before her departure and urged his
suit afresh, with the same result. But his passion had cost too much to
be flung away unused. During her residence abroad he wrote her three
letters, only one of which she briefly answered, in terms which amounted
to little more than this: "Dear Mr. Lawrence, do leave me alone!" At
the end of two years she returned, and was now visiting her married
brother. Lawrence had just heard of her arrival and had come to town to
make, as we have said, a supreme appeal.

Her brother and his wife were out for the evening; Roger found her in
the drawing-room, under the lamp, teaching a stitch in crochet to her
niece, a little girl of ten, who stood leaning at her side. She seemed
to him prettier than before; although, in fact, she looked older and
stouter. Her prettiness, for the most part, however, was a matter of
coquetry; and naturally, as youth departed, coquetry filled the vacancy.
She was fair and plump, and she had a very pretty trick of suddenly
turning her head and showing a charming white throat and ear. Above her
well-filled corsage these objects produced a most agreeable effect. She
always dressed in light colors and with perfect certainty of taste.
Charming as she may have been, there was, nevertheless, about her so
marked a want of the natural, that, to admire her particularly, it was
necessary to be, like Roger, in love with her. She received him with
such flattering friendliness and so little apparent suspicion of his
purpose, that he almost took heart and hope. If she didn't fear a
declaration, perhaps she desired it. For the first half-hour it hung
fire. Roger sat dumbly sensitive to the tempered brightness of her
presence. She talked to better purpose than before she went abroad, and
if Roger had ever doubted, he might have believed now with his eyes
shut. For the moment he sat tongue-tied for very modesty. Miss Morton's
little niece was a very pretty child; her hair was combed out into a
golden cloud, which covered her sloping shoulders. She kept her place
beside her aunt, clasping one of the latter's hands, and staring at
Lawrence with that sweet curiosity of little girls. There glimmered
mistily in the young man's brain a vision of a home-scene in the
future, -- a lamp-lit parlor on a winter night, a placid wife and mother,
wreathed in household smiles, a golden-haired child, and, in the midst,
his sentient self, drunk with possession and gratitude. As the clock
struck nine, the little girl was sent to bed, having been kissed by her
aunt and rekissed, or unkissed shall I say? by her aunt's lover. When
she had disappeared, Roger proceeded to business. He had proposed so
often to Miss Morton, that, actually, practice had begun to tell. It
took but a few moments to make his meaning plain. Miss Morton addressed
herself to her niece's tapestry, and as her lover went on with manly
eloquence, glanced up at him from her work with womanly finesse. He
spoke of his persistent love, of his long waiting and his passionate
hope. Her acceptance of his hand was the main condition of his
happiness. He should never love another woman; if she now refused him,
it was the end of all things; he should continue to exist, to work and
act, to eat and sleep, but he should have ceased to live.

"In heaven's name," he said, "don't answer me as you have answered me
before."

She folded her hands, and with a serious  smile; "I shall not,
altogether," she said. "When I have refused you before, I have simply
told you that I couldn't love you. I can't love you, Mr. Lawrence! I
must repeat it again to-night, but with a better reason than before. I
love another man: I'm engaged."

Roger rose to his feet like a man who has received a heavy blow and
springs forward in self-defence. But he was indefensible, his assailant
inattackable. He sat down again and hung his head. Miss Morton came to
him and took his hand and demanded of him, as a right, that he should be
resigned. "Beyond a certain point," she said, "you have no right to
obtrude upon me the expression of your regret. The injury I do you in
refusing you is less than that I should do you in accepting you without
love."

He looked at her with his eyes full of tears. "Well! I shall never
marry," he said. "There's something you can't refuse me. Though I shall
never possess you, I may at least espouse your memory and live in
intimate union with your image; spend my life on my knees before it!"
She smiled at this fine talk; she had heard so much in her day! He had
fancied himself prepared for the worst, but as he walked back to his
hotel, it seemed intolerably bitter. Its bitterness, however, quickened
his temper and prompted a violent reaction. He would now, he declared,
cast his lot with pure reason. He had tried love and faith, but they
would none of him. He had made a woman a goddess, and she had made him a
fool. He would henceforth care neither for woman nor man, but simply for
comfort, and, if need should be, for pleasure. Beneath this gathered
gust of cynicism the future lay as hard and narrow as the silent street
before him. He was absurdly unconscious that good-humor was lurking
round the very next corner.

It was not till near morning that he was able to sleep. His sleep,
however, had lasted less than an hour when it was interrupted by a loud
noise from the adjoining room. He started up in bed, lending his ear to
the stillness. The sound was immediately repeated; it was that of a
pistol-shot. This second report was followed by a loud shrill cry. Roger
jumped out of bed, thrust himself into his trousers, quitted his room,
and ran to the neighboring door. It opened without difficulty, and
revealed an astonishing scene. In the middle of the floor lay a man, in
his trousers and shirt, his head bathed in blood, his hand grasping the
pistol from which he had just sent a bullet through his brain. Beside
him stood a little girl in her night-dress, her long hair on her
shoulders, shrieking and wringing her hands. Stooping over the prostrate
body, Roger recognized, in spite of his bedabbled visage, the person who
had addressed him in the parlor of the hotel. He had kept the spirit, if
not the letter, of his menace. "O father, father, father!" sobbed the
little girl. Roger, overcome with horror and pity, stooped towards her
and opened his arms. She, conscious of nothing but the presence of human
help, rushed into his embrace and buried her head in his grasp.

The rest of the house was immediately aroused, and the room invaded by a
body of lodgers and servants. Soon followed a couple of policemen, and
finally the proprietor in person. The fact of suicide was so apparent
that Roger's presence was easily explained. From the child nothing but
sobs could be obtained. After a vast amount of talking and pushing and
staring, after a physician had affirmed that the stranger was dead, and
the ladies had passed the child from hand to hand through a bewildering
circle of caresses and questions, the multitude dispersed, and the
little girl was borne away in triumph by the proprietor's wife, further
investigation being appointed for the morrow. For Roger, seemingly, this
was to have been a night of sensations. There came to him, as it wore
away, a cruel sense of his own accidental part in his neighbor's
tragedy. His refusal to help the poor man had  brought on the
catastrophe. The idea haunted him awhile; but at last, with an effort,
he dismissed it. The next man, he assured himself, would have done no
more than he, might possibly have done less. He felt, however, a certain
indefeasible fellowship in the sorrow of the little girl. He lost no
time, the next morning, in calling on the wife of the proprietor. She
was a kindly woman enough, but so thoroughly the mistress of a public
house that she seemed to deal out her very pity over a bar. She
exhibited toward her protegee a hard business-like charity which
foreshadowed vividly to Roger's mind the poor child's probable portion
in life, and repeated to him the little creature's story, as she had
been able to learn it. The father had come in early in the evening, in
great trouble and excitement, and had made her go to bed. He had kissed
her and cried over her, and, of course, made her cry. Late at night she
was aroused by feeling him again at her bedside, kissing her, fondling
her and raving over her. He bade her good night and passed into the
adjoining room, where she heard him fiercely knocking about. She was
very much frightened, and fancied he was out of his mind. She knew that
their troubles had lately been thickening fast, and now the worst had
come. Suddenly he called her. She asked what he wanted, and he bade her
get out of bed and come to him. She trembled, but obeyed. On reaching
the threshold of his room she saw the gas turned low, and her father
standing in his shirt against the door at the other end. He ordered her
to stop where she was. Suddenly she heard a loud report and felt beside
her cheek the wind of a bullet. He had aimed at her with a pistol. She
retreated in terror to her own bedside and buried her head in the
clothes. This, however, did not prevent her from hearing a second
report, followed by a deep groan. Venturing back again, she found her
father on the floor, bleeding from the face. "He meant to kill her, of
course," said the landlady, "that she mightn't be left alone in the
world. It's a queer mixture of cruelty and kindness!"

It seemed to Roger an altogether pitiful tale. He related his own
interview with the deceased, and the latter's menace of suicide. "It
gives me," he said, "a sickening sense of connection with the calamity,
though a gratuitous one, I confess. Nevertheless, I wish he had taken my
ten dollars."

Of the antecedent history of the deceased they could learn little. The
child had recognized Lawrence, and had broken out again into a quivering
convulsion of tears. Little by little, from among her sobs, they
gathered a few facts. Her father had brought her during the preceding
month from St. Louis: they had stopped some time in New York. Her father
had been for months in great distress and want of money. They had once
had money enough; she couldn't say what had become of it. Her mother had
died many months before; she had no other kindred nor friends. Her
father may have had friends, but she never saw them. She could indicate
no source of possible assistance or sympathy. Roger put the poor little
fragments of her story together. The most salient fact among them all
was her absolute destitution.

"Well!" said the proprietress, "there are other people still to be
attended to; I must go about my business. Perhaps you can learn
something more." The little girl sat on the sofa with a pale face and
swollen eyes, and with a stupefied helpless stare watched her friend
depart. She was by no means a pretty child. Her clear auburn hair was
thrust carelessly into a net with broken meshes, and her limbs encased
in a suit of shabby, pretentious mourning. In her appearance, in spite
of her childish innocence and grief, there was something undeniably
vulgar. "She looks as if she belonged to a circus troupe," Roger said to
himself. Her face, however, though without beauty, was not without
interest. Her forehead was high and  boldly rounded, and her mouth
at once large and gentle. Her eyes were light in color, yet by no means
colorless. A sort of arrested, concentrated brightness, a soft
introversion of their rays, gave them a remarkable depth of tone. "Poor
little betrayed, unfriended mortal!" thought the young man.

"What's your name?" he asked.

"Nora Lambert," said the child.

"How old are you?"

"Twelve."

"And you live in St. Louis?"

"We used to live there. I was born there."

"Why had your father come to the East?"

"To make money, he said."

"Where was he going to live?"

"Anywhere he could find business."

"What was his business?"

"He had none. He wanted to find employment."

"To your knowledge, you say, you have no friends nor relations?"

The child gazed a few moments in silence. "He told me when he woke me up
and kissed me, last night, that I hadn't a friend in the world nor a
person that cared for me."

Before the exquisite sadness of this statement Lawrence was silent. He
leaned back in his chair and looked at the child, -- the little forlorn,
precocious, potential woman. His own sense of recent bereavement rose
powerful in his heart and seemed to respond to hers. "Nora," he said,
"come here."

She stared a moment, without moving, and then left the sofa and came
slowly towards him. She was tall for her years. She laid her hand on the
arm of his chair and he took it. "You have seen me before," he said. She
nodded. "Do you remember my taking you last night in my arms?" It was
his fancy that, for an answer, she faintly blushed. He laid his hand on
her head and smoothed away her thick disordered hair. She submitted to
his consoling touch with a plaintive docility. He put his arm round her
waist. An irresistible sense of her childish sweetness, of her tender
feminine promise, stole softly into his pulses. A dozen caressing
questions rose to his lips. Had she been to school? Could she read and
write? Was she musical? She murmured her answers with gathering
confidence. She had never been to school; but her mother had taught her
to read and write a little, and to play a little. She said, almost with
a smile, that she was very backward. Lawrence felt the tears rising to
his eyes; he felt in his heart the tumult of a new emotion. Was it the
inexpugnable instinct of paternity? Was it the restless ghost of his
buried hope? He thought of his angry vow the night before to live only
for himself and turn the key on his heart. From the lips of babes and
sucklings! -- he softly mused. Before twenty-four hours had elapsed a
child's fingers were fumbling with the key. He felt deliciously
contradicted; he was after all but a lame egotist. Was he to believe,
then, that he couldn't live without love, and that he must take it where
he found it? His promise to Miss Morton seemed still to vibrate in his
heart. But there was love and love! He could be a protector, a father, a
brother! What was the child before him but a tragic embodiment of the
misery of isolation, a warning from his own blank future! "God forbid!"
he cried. And as he did so, he drew her towards him and kissed her.

At this moment the landlord appeared with a scrap of paper, which he had
found in the room of the deceased; it being the only object which gave a
clew to his circumstances. He had evidently burned a mass of papers just
before his death, as the grate was filled with fresh ashes. Roger read
the note, which was scrawled in a hurried, vehement hand and ran as
follows: -- 

"This is to say that I must -- I must -- I must! Starving, without a friend
in the world, and a reputation worse than worthless, -- what can I do?
Life's impossible! Try it yourself! As regards my daughter, -- anything,
everything is cruel; but this is the shortest way."

 "She has had to take the longest, after all," said the proprietor,
sotto voce, with a kindly wink at Roger. The landlady soon reappeared
with one of the ladies who had been present overnight, -- a little
pushing, patronizing woman, who seemed strangely familiar with the
various devices of applied charity. "I have come to arrange," she said,
"about our subscription for the little one. I shall not be able to
contribute myself, but I will go round among the other ladies with a
paper. I've just been seeing the reporter of the Universe; he's to
insert a kind of appeal, you know, in his account of the affair.
Perhaps this gentleman will draw up our paper? And I think it will be a
beautiful idea to take the child with me."

Lawrence was sickened. The world's tenderness had fairly begun. Nora
gazed at her energetic benefactress, and then with her eyes appealed
mutely to Roger. Her glance, somehow, moved him to the soul. Poor little
disfathered daughter, -- poor little uprooted germ of womanhood! Her
innocent eyes seemed to more than beseech, -- to admonish almost, and
command. Should he speak and rescue her? Should he subscribe the whole
sum in the name of human charity? He thought of the risk. She was an
unknown quantity. Her nature, her heritage, her good and bad
possibilities, were an unsolved problem. Her father had been an
adventurer; what had her mother been? Conjecture was useless; she was a
vague spot of light on a dark background. He was unable even to decide
whether, after all, she was plain.

"If you want to take her round with you," said the landlady to her
companion, "I'd better sponge off her face."

"No indeed!" cried the other, "she's much better as she is. If I could
only have her little night-gown with the blood on it! Are you sure the
bullet didn't strike your dress, deary? I'm sure we can easily get fifty
names at five dollars apiece. Two hundred and fifty dollars. Perhaps
this gentleman will make it three hundred. Come, sir, now!"

Thus adjured, Roger turned to the child. "Nora," he said, "you know
you're quite alone. You have no home." Her lips trembled, but her eyes
were fixed and fascinated. "Do you think you could love me?" She flushed
to the tender roots of her tumbled hair. "Will you come and try?" Her
range of expression of course was limited; she could only answer by
another burst of tears.

I have adopted a little girl, you know," Roger said, after this, to a
number of his friends; but he felt, rather, as if she had adopted him.
With the downright sense of paternity he found it somewhat difficult to
make his terms. It was indeed an immense satisfaction to feel, as time
went on, that there was small danger of his repenting of his bargain. It
seemed to him more and more that he had obeyed a divine voice; though
indeed he was equally conscious that there was something grotesque in
his new condition, -- in the sudden assumption of paternal care by a man
who had seemed to the world to rejoice so placidly in his sleek and
comfortable singleness. But for all this he found himself able to look
the world squarely in the face. At first it had been with an effort, a
blush, and a deprecating smile that he spoke of his pious venture; but
very soon he began to take a robust satisfaction in alluding to it
freely, in all companies. There was but one man of whose jocular verdict
he thought with some annoyance, -- his cousin Hubert Lawrence, namely, who
was so terribly clever and trenchant, and who had been through life a
commentator formidable to his modesty, though, in the end, always
absolved by his good-nature. But he made up his mind that, though Hubert
might laugh, he himself was serious; and to prove it equally to himself
and his friends, he determined on a great move. He annulled his personal
share in business  and prepared to occupy his house in the country.
The latter was immediately transformed into a home for Nora, -- a home
admirably fitted to become the starting-point of a happy life. Roger's
dwelling stood in the midst of certain paternal acres, -- a little less
than a "place," a little more than a farm; deep in the country, and yet
at two hours' journey from town. Of recent years a dusty disorder had
fallen upon the house, telling of its master's long absences and his
rare and restless visits. It was but half lived in. But beneath this
pulverous deposit the austerer household gods of a former generation
stand erect on their pedestals. As Nora grew older, she came to love her
new home with an almost passionate fondness, and to cherish all its
transmitted memories as a kind compensation for her own dissevered past.
There had lived with Lawrence for many years an elderly woman, of
exemplary virtue, Lucinda Brown by name, who had been a personal
attendant of his mother, and since her death had remained in his service
as the lonely warden of his villa. Roger had an old-time regard for her,
founded upon a fancy that she preserved with pious fidelity certain
graceful household traditions of his mother. It seemed to him that she
might communicate to little Nora, through the medium of housewifely
gossip, a ray of this lady's peaceful domestic genius. Lucinda, who had
been divided between hope and fear as to Roger's possibly marrying, -- the
fear of a diminished empire having exceeded, on the whole, the hope of
company below stairs, -- accepted Nora's arrival as a very comfortable
compromise. The child was too young to menace her authority, and yet of
sufficient importance to warrant a gradual extension of the meagre
household economy. Lucinda had a vision of new carpets and curtains, of
a regenerated kitchen, of a poplin dress, of her niece coming as
sempstress. Nora was the narrow end of the wedge; it would broaden with
her growth. Lucinda therefore was gracious.

For Roger, it seemed as if life had begun afresh and the world had put
on a new face. High above the level horizon now, clearly defined against
the empty sky, rose this little commanding figure, with the added
magnitude that objects acquire in this position. She gave him a vast
deal to think about. The child a man begets and rears weaves its
existence insensibly into the tissue of his life, so that he becomes
trained by fine degrees to the paternal office. But Roger had to skip
experience, and spring with a bound into the paternal consciousness. In
fact he missed his leap, and never tried again. Time should induct him
at leisure into his proper honors, whatever they might be. He felt a
strong aversion to claim in his protegee that prosaic right of
property which belongs to the paternal name. He accepted with solemn
glee his novel duties and cares, but he shrank with a tender humility of
temper from all precise definition of his rights. He was too young and
too sensible of his youth to wish to give this final turn to things. His
heart was flattered, rather, by the idea of living at the mercy of that
melting impermanence which beguiles us forever with deferred promises.
It lay close to his heart, however, to drive away the dusky fears and
sordid memories of Nora's anterior life. He strove to conceal the past
from her childish sense by a great pictured screen, as it were, of
present joys and comforts. He wished her life to date from the moment he
had taken her home. He had taken her for better, for worse; but he
longed to quench all baser chances in the broad daylight of prosperity.
His philosophy in this as in all things was extremely simple, -- to make
her happy, that she might be good. Meanwhile, as he cunningly devised
her happiness, his own seemed securely established. He felt twice as
much a man as before, and the world seemed as much again a world. All
his small stale virtues became fragrant, to his soul, with the borrowed
sweetness of their unselfish use.

One of his first acts, before he left  town, had been to divest her
of her shabby mourning and dress her afresh in light, childish colors.
He learned from the proprietor's wife at his hotel that this was
considered by several ladies interested in Nora's fortunes (especially
by her of the subscription) an act of awful impiety; but he held to his
purpose, nevertheless. When she was freshly arrayed, he took her to a
photographer and made her sit for half a dozen portraits. They were not
flattering; they gave her an aged, sombre, lifeless air. He showed them
to two old ladies of his acquaintance, whose judgment he valued, without
saying whom they represented; the ladies pronounced her a little
monster. It was directly after this that Roger hurried her away to the
peaceful, uncritical country. Her manner here for a long time remained
singularly docile and spiritless. She was not exactly sad, but neither
was she cheerful. She smiled, as if from the fear to displease by not
smiling. She had the air of a child who has been much alone, and who has
learned quite to underestimate her natural right to amusement. She
seemed at times hopelessly, defiantly torpid. "Good heavens!" thought
Roger, as he surreptitiously watched her; "is she stupid?" He perceived
at last, however, that her listless quietude covered a great deal of
observation, and that she led a silent, active life of her own. His
ignorance of her past distressed and vexed him, jealous as he was of
admitting even to himself that she had ever lived till now. He trod on
tiptoe in the region of her early memories, in the dread of reviving
some dormant claim, some unclean ghost. Yet he felt that to know so
little of her twelve first years was to reckon without an important
factor in his problem; as if, in spite of his summons to all the fairies
for this second baptism, the godmother-in-chief lurked maliciously
apart, with intent to arrive at the end of years and spoil the birthday
feast. Nora seemed by instinct to have perceived the fitness of her not
speaking of her own affairs, and indeed displayed in the matter a
precocious good taste. Among her scanty personal effects the only object
referring too vividly to the past had been a small painted photograph of
her mother, a languid-looking lady in a low-necked dress, with a good
deal of prettiness, in spite of the rough handling of the colorist. Nora
had apparently a timid reserve of vanity in the fact, which she once
imparted to Roger with a kind of desperate abruptness, that her mother
had been a public singer; and the heterogeneous nature of her own
culture testified to some familiarity with the scenery of Bohemia. The
common relations of things seemed quite reversed in her brief
experience, and immaturity and precocity shared her young mind in the
freest fellowship. She was ignorant of the plainest truths, and
credulous of the quaintest falsities; unversed in the commonest
learning, and instructed in the rarest. She barely knew that the earth
is round, but she knew that Leonora is the heroine of Il Trovatore.
She could neither write nor spell, but she could perform the most
startling tricks with cards. She confessed to a passion for strong green
tea, and to an interest in the romances of the Sunday newspapers which,
with many other productions of the same complexion, she seemed to have
perused by that subtle divining process common to illiterate children.
Evidently she had sprung from a horribly vulgar soil; she was a brand
snatched from the burning. She uttered various improper words with the
most guileless accent and glance, and was as yet equally unsuspicious of
the grammar and the Catechism. But when once Roger had straightened out
her phrase, she was careful to preserve its shape; and when he had
solemnly proscribed these all-too-innocent words, they seldom
reappeared. For the rudiments of theological learning, also, she
manifested a due respect. Considering the make-shift process of her
growth, he marvelled that it had not straggled into even more perilous
places. His impression of her  father was fatal, ineffaceable; the
late Mr. Lambert had been a blackguard. Roger had a fancy, however, that
this was not all the truth. He was free to assume that the poor fellow's
wife had been of a gentle nurture and temper; and he had even framed on
this theme an ingenious little romance, which gave him a great deal of
comfort. Mrs. Lambert had been deceived by the lacquered plausibility of
her husband, and had awaked after marriage to a life of shifting
expedients and struggling poverty, during which she had been glad to
turn to account the voice which the friends of her happier girlhood had
praised. She had died outwearied and broken-hearted, invoking human pity
on her child. Roger established in this way a sentimental intimacy with
the poor lady's spirit, and exchanged many a greeting over the little
girl's head with this vague maternal shape. But he was by no means given
up to these imaginative joys; he addressed himself vigorously to the
practical needs of the case. He determined to drive in the first nail
with his own hands, to lay the first smooth foundation-stones of her
culture, to teach her to read and write and cipher, to associate himself
largely with the growth of her primal sense of things. Behold him thus
converted into a gentle pedagogue, wooing with mild inflections the
timid ventures of her thought. A moted morning sunbeam used to enter his
little study and, resting on Nora's auburn hair, seemed to make of the
place a humming school-room. Roger began also to anticipate the future
needs of preceptorship. He plunged into a course of useful reading, and
devoured a hundred volumes on education, on hygiene, on morals, on
history. He drew up a table of rules and observances for the child's
health; he weighed and measured her food, and spent hours with Lucinda,
the minister's wife, and the doctor, in the discussion of her regimen
and clothing. He bought her a pony, and rode with her over the
neighboring country, roamed with her in the woods and fields, and made
discreet provision of society among the little damsels of the
country-side. A doting grandmother, in all this matter, could not have
shown a finer genius for detail. His zeal indeed left him very little
peace, and Lucinda often endeavored to assuage it by the assurance that
he was fretting himself away and wearing himself thin on his happiness.
He passed a dozen times a week from the fear of coddling and spoiling
the child to the fear of letting her run wild and grow vulgar amid too
much rusticity. Sometimes he dismissed her tasks for days together, and
kept her idling at his side in the winter sunshine; sometimes for a week
he kept her within doors, reading to her, preaching to her, showing her
prints, and telling her stories. She had an excellent musical ear, and
the promise of a charming voice; Roger took counsel in a dozen quarters
as to whether he ought to make her use her voice or spare it. Once he
took her up to town to a matinee at one of the theatres, and was in
anguish for a week afterwards, lest he had quickened some inherited
tendency to dissipation. He used to lie awake at night, trying hard to
fix in his mind the happy medium between coldness and weak fondness.
With a heart full of tenderness, he used to dole out his caresses. He
was in doubt for a long time as to what he should have her call him. At
the outset he decided instinctively against "father." It was a question
between "Mr. Lawrence" and his baptismal name. He weighed the
proprieties for a week, and then he determined the child should choose
for herself. She had as yet avoided addressing him by name; at last he
asked what name she preferred. She stared rather blankly at the time,
but a few days afterwards he heard her shouting "Roger!" from the garden
under his window. She had ventured upon a small shallow pond enclosed by
his land, and now coated with thin ice. The ice had cracked with a great
report under her tread, and was swaying gently beneath her weight, at
some yards from the  edge. In her alarm her heart had chosen, and
her heart's election was never subsequently gainsaid. Circumstances
seemed to affect her slowly; for a long time she showed few symptoms of
change. Roger in his slippers, by the fireside, in the winter evenings,
used to gaze at her with an anxious soul, and wonder whether it was not
only a stupid child that could sit for an hour by the chimney-corner,
stroking the cat's back in absolute silence, asking no questions and
telling no lies. Then, musing upon a certain positive, elderly air in
her brow and eyes, he would fancy that she was wiser than he knew; that
she was mocking him or judging him, and counter-plotting his pious
labors with elfish gravity. Arrange it as he might, he could not call
her pretty. Plain women are apt to be clever; mightn't she (horror of
horrors!) turn out too clever? In the evening, after she had attended
Nora to bed, Lucinda would come into the little library, and she and
Roger would solemnly put their heads together. In matters in which he
deemed her sex gave her an advantage of judgment, he used freely to ask
her opinion. She made a vast parade of motherly science, rigid spinster
as she was, and hinted by many a nod and wink at the mystic depths of
her penetration. As to the child's being thankless or heartless, she
quite reassured him. Didn't she cry herself to sleep, under her breath,
on her little pillow? Didn't she mention him every night in her
prayers, -- him, and him alone? However much her family may have left to
be desired as a "family," -- and of its shortcomings in this respect
Lucinda had an altogether awful sense, -- Nora was clearly a lady in her
own right. As for her plain face, they could wait awhile for a change.
Plainness in a child was almost always prettiness in a woman; and at all
events, if she was not to be pretty, she need never be vain.

Roger had no wish to cultivate in his young companion any expression of
formal gratitude; for it was the very key-stone of his plan that their
relation should ripen into a perfect matter of course; but he watched
patiently, like a wandering botanist for the first woodland violets for
the year, for the shy field-flower of spontaneous affection. He aimed at
nothing more or less than to inspire the child with a passion. Until he
had detected in her glance and tone the note of passionate tenderness,
his experiment must have failed. It would have succeeded on the day when
she should break out into cries and tears and tell him with a clinging
embrace that she loved him. So he argued with himself; but, in fact, he
expected perhaps more than belongs to the lame logic of this life. As a
child, she would be too irreflective to play so pretty a part; as a
young girl, too self-conscious. I undertake to tell no secrets, however.
Roger, thanks to a wholesome reserve of temper in the matter of
sentiment, continued to possess his soul in patience. She meanwhile,
seemingly, showed as little of distrust as of positive tenderness. She
grew and grew in ungrudged serenity. It was in person, first, that she
began gently, or rather ungently, to expand; acquiring a well-nurtured
sturdiness of contour, but passing quite into the shambling and sheepish
stage of girlhood. Lucinda cast about her in vain for possibilities of
future beauty, and took refuge in vigorous attention to the young girl's
bountiful auburn hair, which she combed and braided with a kind of
fierce assiduity. The winter had passed away, the spring was well
advanced. Roger, looking at his protegee, felt a certain sinking of
the heart as he thought of his cousin Hubert's visit. As matters stood,
Nora bore rather livelier testimony to his charity than to his taste.

He had debated some time as to whether he should write to Hubert and as
to how he should write. Hubert Lawrence was some four years his junior;
but Roger had always allowed him a large precedence in the things of the
mind. Hubert had just entered the Unitarian ministry; it seemed now that
grace would surely lend a generous  hand to nature and complete the
circle of his accomplishments. He was extremely good-looking and clever
with just such a cleverness as seemed but an added personal charm. He
and Roger had been much together in early life and had formed an
intimacy strangely compounded of harmony and discord. Utterly unlike in
temper and tone, they neither thought nor felt nor acted together on any
single point. Roger was constantly differing, mutely and profoundly, and
Hubert frankly and sarcastically; but each, nevertheless, seemed to find
in the other a welcome counterpart and complement to his own
personality. There was in their relation a large measure of healthy
boyish levity which kept them from lingering long on delicate ground;
but they felt at times that they belonged, by temperament, to
irreconcilable camps, and that the more each of them came to lead his
own life, the more their lives would diverge. Roger was of a loving turn
of mind, and it cost him many a sigh that a certain glassy hardness of
soul on his cousin's part was forever blunting the edge of his
affection. He nevertheless had a profound regard for him; he admired his
talents, he enjoyed his society, he wrapped him about with his
good-will. He had told him more than once that he cared for him more
than Hubert would ever believe, could in the nature of things
believe, -- far more than Hubert cared for him, inasmuch as Hubert's
benevolence was largely spiced with contempt. "Judge what a real regard
I have for you," Roger had said, "since I forgive you even that." But
Hubert, who reserved his faith for heavenly mysteries, had small
credence for earthly ones, and he had replied that to his perception
they loved each other with a precisely equal ardor, beyond everything in
life, to wit, but their own peculiar pleasure. Roger had in his mind a
kind of metaphysical "idea" of a possible Hubert which the actual Hubert
took a wanton satisfaction in turning upside down. Roger had drawn in
his fancy a pure and ample outline, into which the wilful young minister
projected a grotesquely unproportioned shadow. Roger took his cousin
more au serieux than the young man himself. In fact, Hubert had
apparently come into the world to play. He played at life, altogether;
he played at learning, he played at theology, he played at friendship;
and it was to be conjectured that, on particular holidays, he would play
with especial relish at love. Hubert, for some time, had been settled in
New York, and of late they had exchanged but few letters. Something had
been said about Hubert's coming to spend a part of his summer vacation
with his cousin; now that the latter was at the head of a household and
a family, Roger reminded him of their understanding. He had finally told
him his little romance, with a fine bravado of indifference to his
verdict; but he was, in secret, extremely anxious to obtain Hubert's
judgment of the heroine. Hubert replied that he was altogether prepared
for the news, and that it must be a very pretty sight to see him at
dinner pinning her bib, or to hear him sermonizing her over a torn frock.

"But, pray, what relation is the young lady to me?" he added. "How far
does the adoption go, and where does it stop? Your own proper daughter
would be my cousin; but I take it a man isn't to have fictitious cousins
grafted upon him, at this rate. I shall wait till I see her; then, if
she is pleasing, I shall personally adopt her into cousinship."

He came down for a fortnight, in July, and was soon introduced to Nora.
She came sidling shyly into the room, with a rent in her short-waisted
frock, and the "Child's Own Book" in her hand, with her finger in the
history of "The Discreet Princess." Hubert kissed her gallantly, and
declared that he was happy to make his acquaintance. She retreated
to a station beside Roger's knee and stood staring at the young man.
"Elle a les pieds enormes," said Hubert.

 Roger was annoyed, partly with himself, for he made her wear big
shoes. "What do you think of him?" he asked, stroking the child's hair,
and hoping, half maliciously, that, with the frank perspicacity of
childhood, she would utter some formidable truth about the young man.
But to appreciate Hubert's failings, one must have had vital experience
of them. At this time twenty-five years of age, he was a singularly
handsome youth. Although of about the same height as his cousin, the
pliant slimness of his figure made him look taller. He had a cool gray
eye and a mass of fair curling hair. His features were cut with
admirable purity; his teeth were white, his smile superb. "I think,"
said Nora, "that he looks like the Prince Avenant."

Before Hubert went away, Roger asked him for a deliberate opinion of the
child. Was she ugly or pretty? was she interesting? He found it hard,
however, to induce him to consider her seriously. Hubert's observation
was exercised rather less in the interest of general truth than of
particular profit; and of what profit to Hubert was Nora's shambling
childhood? "I can't think of her as a girl," he said; "she seems to me a
boy. She climbs trees, she scales fences, she keeps rabbits, she
straddles upon your old mare, bare-backed. I found her this morning
wading in the pond up to her knees. She's growing up a hoyden; you ought
to give her more civilized influences than she enjoys hereabouts; you
ought to engage a governess, or send her to school. It's well enough
now; but, my poor fellow, what will you do when she's twenty?"

You may imagine, from Hubert's sketch, that Nora's was a happy life. She
had few companions, but during the long summer days, in woods and fields
and orchards, Roger initiated her into all those rural mysteries which
are so dear to childhood and so fondly remembered in later years. She
grew more hardy and lively, more inquisitive, more active. She tasted
deeply of the joy of tattered dresses and sun-burnt cheeks and arms, and
long nights at the end of tired days. But Roger, pondering his cousin's
words, began to believe that to keep her longer at home would be to fail
of justice to the ewig Weibliche. The current of her growth would soon
begin to flow deeper than the plummet of a man's wit. He determined,
therefore, to send her to school, and he began with this view to
investigate the merits of various establishments. At last, after a vast
amount of meditation and an extensive correspondence with the
school-keeping class, he selected one which appeared rich in fair
promises. Nora, who had never known an hour's schooling, entered
joyously upon her new career; but she gave her friend that sweet and
long-deferred emotion of which I have spoken, when, on parting with him,
she hung upon his neck with a sort of convulsive fondness. He took her
head in his two hands and looked at her; her eyes were streaming with
tears. During the month which followed he received from her a dozen
letters, sadly misspelled, but divinely lachrymose.

It is needless to relate in detail this phase of Nora's history. It
lasted two years. Roger found that he missed her sadly; his occupation
was gone. Still, her very absence occupied him. He wrote her long
letters of advice, told her everything that happened to him, and sent
her books and useful garments and wholesome sweets. At the end of a year
he began to long terribly to take her back again; but as his judgment
forbade this measure, he determined to beguile the following year by
travel. Before starting, he went to the little country town which was
the seat of her academy, to bid Nora farewell. He had not seen her since
she left him, as he had chosen -- quite heroically, poor fellow -- to have
her spend her vacation with a school-mate, the bosom friend of this
especial period. He found her surprisingly altered. She looked three
years older;  she was growing by the hour. Prettiness and symmetry
had not yet been vouchsafed to her; but Roger found in her young
imperfection a sweet assurance that her account with nature was not yet
closed. She had, moreover, a subtle grace of her own. She had reached
that charming girlish moment when the broad freedom of childhood begins
to be faintly tempered by the sense of sex. She was coming fast, too,
into her woman's heritage of garrulity. She entertained him for a whole
morning; she took him into her confidence; she rattled and prattled
unceasingly upon all the swarming little school interests, -- her likes
and aversions, her hopes and fears, her friends and teachers, her
studies and story-books. Roger sat grinning in broad enchantment; she
seemed to him to exhale the very genius of girlhood. For the first time,
he became conscious of her native force; there was a vast deal of her;
she overflowed. When they parted, he gave his hopes to her keeping in a
long, long kiss. She kissed him too, but this time with smiles, not with
tears. She neither suspected nor could she have understood the thought
which, during this interview, had blossomed in her friend's mind. On
leaving her, he took a long walk in the country over unknown roads. That
evening he consigned his thought to a short letter, addressed to Mrs.
Keith. This was the present title of the lady who had once been Miss
Morton. She had married and gone abroad; where, in Rome, she had done as
the Americans do, and entered the Roman Church. His letter ran as
follows: -- 

"My dear Mrs. Keith: I promised you once to be very unhappy, but I doubt
whether you believed me; you didn't look as if you did. I am sure, at
all events, you hoped otherwise. I am told you have become a Roman
Catholic. Perhaps you have been praying for me at St. Peter's. This is
the easiest way to account for my conversion to a worthier state of
mind. You know that, two years ago, I adopted a homeless little girl.
One of these days she will be a lovely woman. I mean to do what I can to
make her one. Perhaps, six years hence, she will be grateful enough not
to refuse me as you did. Pray for me more than ever. I have begun at the
beginning; it will be my own fault if I haven't a perfect wife."


ROGER'S journey was long and various. He went to the West Indies and to
South America, whence, taking a ship at one of the eastern ports, he
sailed round the Horn and paid a visit to Mexico. He journeyed thence to
California, and returned home across the Isthmus, stopping awhile on his
upward course at various Southern cities. It was in some degree a
sentimental journey. Roger was a practical man; as he went he gathered
facts and noted manners and customs; but the muse of observation for him
was his little girl at home, the ripening companion of his own ripe
years. It was for her sake that he used his eyes and ears and garnered
information. He had determined that she should be a lovely woman and a
perfect wife; but to be worthy of such a woman as his fancy
foreshadowed, he himself had much to learn. To be a good husband, one
must first be a wise man; to educate her, he should first educate
himself. He would make it possible that daily contact with him should be
a liberal education, and that his simple society should be a benefit.
For this purpose he should be stored with facts, tempered and tested by
experience. He travelled in a spirit of solemn attention, like some grim
devotee of a former age, making a pilgrimage for the welfare of one he
loved. He kept with great labor a copious diary, which he meant to read
aloud on the winter nights of coming years. His diary was directly
addressed to Nora, she being implied throughout as reader or auditor. He
thought at moments of his vow to Isabel Morton, and asked himself what
had become of the passion of that hour. It had betaken itself to the
common limbo of our dead passions. He rejoiced to know that she was well
and happy; he meant to write to her again on his return and reiterate
the assurance of his own happiness. He mused ever and anon on the nature
of his affection for Nora, and wondered what earthly name he could call
it by. Assuredly he was not in love with her: you couldn't fall in love
with a child. But if he had not a lover's love, he had at least a
lover's jealousy; it would have made him miserable to believe his scheme
might miscarry. It would fail, he fondly assured himself, by no fault of
hers. He was sure of her future; in that last interview at school he had
guessed the answer to the riddle of her formless girlhood. If he could
only be as sure of his own constancy as of her worthiness! On this point
poor Roger might fairly have let his conscience rest; but to test his
resolution, he deliberately courted temptation and on a dozen occasions
allowed present loveliness to measure itself with absent. At the risk of
a terrible increase of blushes, he bravely incurred the blandishments of
various charming persons of the south. They failed signally, in every
case but one, to quicken his pulses. He studied them, he noted their
gifts and graces, so that he might know the range of the feminine charm.
Of the utmost that women can be he wished to have personal experience.
But with the sole exception I have mentioned, not a charmer of them all
but shone with a radiance less magical than that dim but rounded shape
which glimmered forever in the dark future, like the luminous complement
of the early moon. It was at Lima that his poor little potential Nora
suffered temporary eclipse. He made here the acquaintance of a young
Spanish lady whose plump and full-blown innocence seemed to him divinely
amiable. If ignorance  is grace, what a lamentable error to be
wise! He had crossed from Havana to Rio on the same vessel with her
brother, a friendly young fellow, who had made him promise to come and
stay with him on his arrival at Lima. Roger, in execution of this
promise, passed three weeks under his roof, in the society of the lovely
Senorita. She caused him to reflect, with a good deal of zeal. She moved
him the more because, being wholly without coquetry, she made no attempt
whatever to interest him. Her charm was the charm of absolute naivete
and a certain tame, unseasoned sweetness, -- the sweetness of an angel who
is without mundane reminiscences; to say nothing of a pair of liquid
hazel eyes and a coil of crinkled blue-black hair. She could barely
write her name, and from the summer twilight of her mind, which seemed
to ring with amorous bird-notes, twittering in a lazy Eden, she flung a
scornful shadow upon Nora's prospective condition. Roger thought of
Nora, by contrast, as a creature of senseless mechanism, a thing wound
up with a key, creaking and droning through the barren circle of her
graces. Why travel so far round about for a wife, when here was one
ready made to his heart, as illiterate as an angel and as faithful as
the little page of a mediaeval ballad, -- and with those two perpetual
love-lights beneath her silly little forehead?

Day by day, at the Senorita's side, Roger grew better pleased with the
present. It was so happy, so idle, so secure! He protested against the
future. He grew impatient of the stiff little figure which he had posted
in the distance, to stare at him with those monstrous pale eyes: they
seemed to grow and grow as he thought of them. In other words, he was in
love with Teresa. She, on her side, was delighted to be loved. She
caressed him with her fond dark looks and smiled perpetual assent. Late
one afternoon, at the close of a long hot day, which had left with Roger
the unwholesome fancy of a perpetual siesta, troubled by a vague
confusion of dreams, they ascended together to a terrace on the top of
the house. The sun had just disappeared; the lovely earth below and
around was drinking in the cool of night. They stood awhile in silence;
at last Roger felt that he must speak of his love. He walked away to the
farther end of the terrace, casting about in his mind for the fitting
words. They were hard to find. His companion spoke a little English, and
he a little Spanish; but there came upon him a sudden perplexing sense
of the infantine rarity of her wits. He had never done her the honor to
pay her a compliment, he had never really talked with her. It was not
for him to talk, but for her to perceive! She turned about, leaning back
against the parapet of the terrace, looking at him and smiling. She was
always smiling. She had on an old faded pink morning-dress, very much
open at the throat, and a ribbon round her neck, to which was suspended
a little cross of turquoise. One of the braids of her hair had fallen
down, and she had drawn it forward and was plaiting the end with her
plump white fingers. Her nails were not fastidiously clean. He went
towards her. When he next became perfectly conscious of their relative
positions, he knew that he had passionately kissed her, more than once,
and that she had more than suffered him. He stood holding both her
hands; he was blushing; her own complexion was undisturbed, her smile
barely deepened; another of her braids had come down. He was filled with
a sense of pleasure in her sweetness, tempered by a vague feeling of
pain in his all-too-easy conquest. There was nothing of poor Teresita
but that you could kiss her! It came upon him with a sort of horror that
he had never yet distinctly told her that he loved her. "Teresa," he
said, almost angrily, "I love you. Do you understand?" For all answer
she raised his two hands successively to her lips. Soon after this she
went off with her mother to church.

The next morning, one of his friend's clerks brought him a package of
letters  from his banker. One of them was a note from Nora. It ran
as follows: -- 

Dear Roger: I want so much to tell you that I have just got the prize
for the piano. I hope you will not think it very silly to write so far
only to tell you this. But I'm so proud I want you to know it. Of the
three girls who tried for it, two were seventeen. The prize is a
beautiful picture called "Mozart a Vienne"; probably you have seen it.
Miss Murray says I may hang it up in my bedroom. Now I have got to go
and practise, for Miss Murray says I must practise more than ever. My
dear Roger, I do hope you are enjoying your travels. I have learned lots
of geography, following you on the map. Don't ever forget your loving

Nora.

After reading this letter, Roger told his host that he would have to
leave him. The young Peruvian demurred, objected, and begged for a reason.

"Well," said Roger, "I find I'm in love with your sister." The words
sounded on his ear as if some one else had spoken them. Teresa's light
was quenched, and she had no more fascination than a smouldering lamp,
smelling of oil.

"Why, my dear fellow," said his friend, "that seems to me a reason for
staying. I shall be most happy to have you for a brother-in-law."

"It's impossible! I'm engaged to a young lady in my own country."

"You are in love here, you are engaged there, and you go where you are
engaged! You Englishmen are strange fellows!"

"Tell Teresa that I adore her, but that I am pledged at home. I had
rather not see her."

And so Roger departed from Lima, without further communion with Teresa.
On his return home he received a letter from her brother, telling him of
her engagement to a young merchant of Valparaiso, -- an excellent match.
The young lady sent him her salutations. Roger, answering his friend's
letter, begged that the Doa Teresa would accept, as a wedding-present,
of the accompanying trinket, -- a little brooch in turquoise. It would
look very well with pink!

Roger reached home in the autumn, but left Nora at school till the
beginning of the Christmas holidays. He occupied the interval in
refurnishing his house, and clearing the stage for the last act of the
young girl's childhood. He had always possessed a modest taste for
upholstery; he now began to apply it under the guidance of a delicate
idea. His idea led him to prefer, in all things, the fresh and graceful
to the grave and formal, and to wage war throughout his old dwelling on
the lurking mustiness of the past. He had a lively regard for elegance,
balanced by a horror of wanton luxury. He fancied that a woman is the
better for being well dressed and well domiciled, and that vanity, too
stingily treated, is sure to avenge itself. So he took her into account.
Nothing annoyed him more, however, than the fear of seeing Nora a
precocious fine lady; so that while he aimed at all possible purity of
effect, he stayed his hand here and there before certain admonitory
relics of ancestral ugliness and virtue, embodied for the most part in
hair-cloth and cotton damask. Chintz and muslin, flowers and photographs
and books, gave their clear light tone to the house. Nothing could be
more tenderly propitious and virginal, or better chosen to chasten alike
the young girl's aspirations and remind her of her protector's tenderness.

Since his return he had designedly refused himself a glimpse of her. He
wished to give her a single undivided welcome to his home and his heart.
Shortly before Christmas, as he had even yet not laid by his hammer and
nails, Lucinda Brown was sent to fetch her from school. If Roger had
expected that Nora would return with any marked accession of beauty, he
would have had to say "Amen" with an effort. She had pretty well ceased
to be a child; she was still his grave, imperfect  Nora. She had
gained her full height, -- a great height, which her young strong slimness
rendered the more striking. Her slender throat supported a head of
massive mould, bound about with dense auburn braids. Beneath a somewhat
serious brow her large, fair eyes retained their collected light, as if
uncertain where to fling it. Now and then the lids parted widely and
showered down these gathered shafts; and if at these times a certain
rare smile divided, in harmony, her childish lips, Nora was for the
moment a passable beauty. But for the most part, the best charm of her
face was in a modest refinement of line, which rather evaded notice than
courted it. The first impression she was likely to produce was of a kind
of awkward slender majesty. Roger pronounced her "stately," and for a
fortnight thought her too imposing by half; but as the days went on, and
the pliable innocence of early maidenhood gave a soul to this formidable
grace, he began to feel that in essentials she was still the little
daughter of his charity. He even began to observe in her an added
consciousness of this lowly position; as if with the growth of her mind
she had come to reflect upon it, and deem it rather less and less a
matter of course. He meditated much as to whether he should frankly talk
it over with her and allow her to feel that, for him as well, their
relation could never become commonplace. This would be in a measure
untender, but would it not be prudent? Ought he not, in the interest of
his final purpose, to force home to her soul in her sensitive youth an
impression of all that she owed him, so that when his time had come, if
imagination should lead her a-wandering, gratitude would stay her steps?
A dozen times over he was on the verge of making his point, of saying,
"Nora, Nora, these are not vulgar alms; I expect a return. One of these
days you must pay your debt. Guess my riddle! I love you less than you
think, -- and more! A word to the wise." But he was silenced by a saving
sense of the brutality of such a course, and by a suspicion that, after
all, it was not needful. A passion of gratitude was silently gathering
in the young girl's heart: that heart could be trusted to keep its
engagements. A deep conciliatory purpose seemed now to pervade her life,
of infinite delight to Roger as little by little it stole upon his mind,
like the fragrance of a deepening spring. He had his idea: he suspected
that she had hers. They were but opposite faces of the same deep need.
Her musing silence, her deliberate smiles, the childish keenness of her
questionings, the growing womanly cunning of her little nameless
services and caresses, were all alike redolent of a pious sense of
suffered beneficence, which implied perfect self-devotion as a response.

On Christmas eve they sat together alone by a blazing log-fire in
Roger's little library. He had been reading aloud a chapter of his
diary, to which Nora sat listening in dutiful demureness, though her
thoughts evidently were nearer home than Cuba and Peru. There is no
denying it was dull; he could gossip to better purpose. He felt its
dulness himself, and closing it finally with good-humored petulance,
declared it was fit only to throw into the fire. Upon which Nora looked
up, protesting. "You must do no such thing," she said. "You must keep
your journals carefully, and one of these days I shall have them bound
in morocco and gilt, and ranged in a row in my own bookcase."

"That's but a polite way of burning them up," said Roger. "They will be
as little read as if they were in the fire. I don't know how it is. They
seemed to be very amusing when I wrote them: they're as stale as an old
newspaper now. I can't write: that's the amount of it. I'm a very stupid
fellow, Nora; you might as well know it first as last."

Nora's school had been of the punctilious Episcopal order, and she had
learned there the pretty custom of decorating the house at
Christmas-tide with garlands and crowns of evergreen and holly. She had
spent the day in  decking out the chimney-piece, and now, seated on
a stool under the mantel-shelf, she twisted the last little wreath,
which was to complete her design. A great still snow-storm was falling
without, and seemed to be blocking them in from the world. She bit off
the thread with which she had been binding her twigs, held out her
garland to admire its effect, and then: "I don't believe you're stupid,
Roger," she said; "and if I did, I shouldn't much care."

"Is that philosophy, or indifference?" said the young man.

"I don't know that it's either; it's because I know you're so good."

"That's what they say about all stupid people."

Nora added another twig to her wreath and bound it up. "I'm sure," she
said at last, "that when people are as good as you are, they can't be
stupid. I should like some one to tell me you're stupid. I know, Roger;
I know!"

The young man began to feel a little uneasy; it was no part of his plan
that her good-will should spend itself too soon. "Dear me, Nora, if you
think so well of me, I shall find it hard to live up to your
expectations. I'm afraid I shall disappoint you. I have a little
gimcrack to put in your stocking to-night; but I'm rather ashamed of it
now."

"A gimcrack more or less is of small account. I've had my stocking
hanging up these three years, and everything I possess is a present from
you."

Roger frowned; the conversation had taken just such a turn as he had
often longed to provoke, but now it was too much for him. "O, come," he
said; "I have done simply my duty to my little girl."

"But, Roger," said Nora, staring with expanded eyes, "I'm not your
little girl."

His frown darkened; his heart began to beat. "Don't talk nonsense!" he
said.

"But, Roger, it's true. I'm no one's little girl. Do you think I've no
memory? Where is my father? Where is my mother?"

"Listen to me," said Roger, sternly. "You mustn't talk of such things."

"You mustn't forbid me, Roger. I can't think of them without thinking of
you. This is Christmas eve! Miss Murray told us that we must never let
it pass without thinking of all that it means. But without Miss Murray,
I have been thinking all day of things which are hard to name, -- of death
and life, of my parents and you, of my incredible happiness. I feel
to-night like a princess in a fairy-tale. I'm a poor creature, without a
friend, without a penny or a home; and yet, here I sit by a blazing
fire, with money, with food, with clothes, with love. The snow outside
is burying the stone-walls, and yet here I can sit and simply say, How
pretty! Suppose I were in it, wandering and begging, -- I might have
been! Would I think it pretty then? Roger, Roger, I'm no one's child!"
The tremor in her voice deepened, and she broke into a sudden passion of
tears. Roger took her in his arms and tried to soothe away her sobs. But
she disengaged herself and went on with an almost fierce exaltation:
"No, no, I won't be comforted! I have had comfort enough, I hate it. I
want for an hour to be myself and feel how little that is, to be my
poor, wicked father's daughter, to fancy I hear my mother's voice. I've
never spoken of them before; you must let me to-night. You must tell me
about my father; you know something I don't. You never refused me
anything, Roger; don't refuse me this. He wasn't good, like you; but now
he can do no harm. You have never mentioned his name to me, but happy as
we are here together, we should be poorly set to work to despise him!"

Roger yielded to the vehemence of this flood of emotion. He stood
watching her with two helpless tears in his own eyes, and then he drew
her gently towards him and kissed her on the forehead. She took up her
work again, and he told her, with every minutest  detail he could
recall, the story of his sole brief interview with Mr. Lambert.
Gradually he lost the sense of effort and reluctance, and talked freely,
abundantly, almost with pleasure. Nora listened with tender curiosity
and with an amount of self-control which denoted the habit of constant
retrospect. She asked a hundred questions as to Roger's impression of
her father's appearance. Wasn't he wonderfully handsome? Then taking up
the tale herself, she poured out a torrent of feverish reminiscence of
her childhood and unpacked her early memories with a kind of rapture of
relief. Her evident joy in this frolic of confidence gave Roger a
pitying sense of what her long silence must have cost her. But evidently
she bore him no grudge, and his present tolerance of her rambling gossip
seemed to her but another proof of his tenderness and charity. She rose
at last, and stood before the fire, into which she had thrown the refuse
of her greenery, watching it blaze up and turn to ashes. "So much for
past!" she said, at last. "The rest is the future. The girls at
school used to be always talking about what they meant to do in coming
years, what they hoped, what they wished; wondering, choosing, and
longing. You don't know how girls talk, Roger; you'd be surprised! I
never used to say much; my future is fixed. I've nothing to choose,
nothing to hope, nothing to fear. I'm to make you happy. That's simple
enough. You have undertaken to bring me up, Roger; you must do your
best, because now I'm here, it's for long, and you'd rather have a wise
girl than a silly one." And she smiled with a kind of tentative
daughterliness through the traces of her recent grief. She put her two
hands on his shoulders and eyed him with arch solemnity. "You shall
never repent. I shall learn everything, I shall be everything! Oh! I
wish I were pretty." And she tossed back her head in impatience of her
fatal plainness, with an air which forced Roger to assure her that she
would do very well as she was. "If you are satisfied," she said, "I am!"
For a moment Roger felt as if she were twenty years old, as if the
future had flashed down on him and a proposal of marriage was at his
tongue's end.

This serious Christmas eve left its traces upon many ensuing weeks.
Nora's education was resumed with a certain added solemnity. Roger was
no longer obliged to condescend to the level of her intelligence, and he
found reason to thank his stars that he had laid up a provision of
facts. He found use for all he possessed. The day of childish "lessons"
was over, and Nora sought instruction in the perusal of various
classical authors, in her own and other tongues, in concert with her
friend. They read aloud to each other alternately, discussed their
acquisitions and digested them with perhaps equal rapidity. Roger, in
former years, had had but a small literary appetite; he liked a few
books and knew them well, but he felt as if to settle down to an unread
author were very like starting on a journey, -- a case for farewells, a
packing of trunks, and buying of tickets. His curiosity, now, however,
imbued and quickened with a motive, led him through a hundred untrodden
paths. He found it hard sometimes to keep pace with Nora's pattering
step; through the flowery lanes of poetry, in especial, she would gallop
without drawing breath. Was she quicker-witted than her friend, or only
more superficial? Something of one, doubtless, and something of the
other. Roger was forever suspecting her of a deeper penetration than his
own, and hanging his head with an odd mixture of pride and humility. Her
youthful brightness, at times, made him feel irretrievably dull and
antiquated. His ears would tingle, his cheeks would burn, his old hope
would fade into a shadow. "It's a -- " he would declare. "How can I ever
have for her that charm of infallibility, that romance of omniscience,
that a woman demands of her lover? She has seen me scratching my head,
she has seen me counting on my fingers!  Before she's seventeen
she'll be mortally tired of me, and by the time she's twenty I shall be
fatally familiar and incurably stale. It's very well for her to talk
about life-long devotion and eternal gratitude. She doesn't know the
meaning of words. She must grow and outgrow, that's her first necessity.
She must come to woman's estate and pay the inevitable tribute. I can
open the door and let in the lover. If her present sentiment is in its
way a passion, I shall have had my turn. I can't hope to be the object
of two passions. I must thank the Lord for small favors!" Then as he
seemed to taste, in advance, the bitterness of disappointment, casting
him about him angrily for some means of appeal: "I ought to go
away and stay away for years and never write at all, instead of
compounding ponderous diaries to make even my absence detestable. I
ought to convert myself into a beneficent shadow, a vague tutelary name.
Then I ought to come back in glory, fragrant with exotic perfumes and
shod with shoes of mystery! Otherwise, I ought to clip the wings of her
fancy and put her on half-rations. I ought to snub her and scold her and
bully her and tell her she's deplorably plain, -- treat her as Rochester
treats Jane Eyre. If I were only a good old Catholic, that I might shut
her up in a convent and keep her childish and stupid and contented!"
Roger felt that he was too doggedly conscientious; but abuse his
conscience as he would, he could not make it yield an inch; so that in
the constant strife between his egotistical purpose and his generous
temper, the latter kept gaining ground and Nora innocently enjoyed the
spoils of victory. It was his very generosity that detained him on the
spot, by her side, watching her, working for her, and performing a
hundred offices which in other hands would have lost their sweet
precision. Roger watched intently for the signs of that inevitable hour
when a young girl begins to loosen her fingers in the grasp of a guiding
hand and wander softly in pursuit of that sinuous silver thread of
experience which deflects, through meadows of perennial green, from the
dull gray stream of the common lot. She had relapsed in the course of
time into the careless gayety and the light immediate joys of girlhood.
If she cherished a pious purpose in her heart, she made no indecent
parade of it. But her very placidity and patience somehow afflicted her
friend. She was too monotonously sweet, too easily obedient. If once in
a while she would only flash out into petulance or rebellion! She kept
her temper so carefully: what in the world was she keeping it for? If
she would only bless him for once with an angry look and tell him that
he bored her, that he worried and disgusted her!

During the second year after her return from school Roger began to fancy
that she half avoided his society and resented his share in her
occupations. She was fonder of lonely walks, readings and reveries. She
had all of a young girl's passion for novels, and she had been in the
habit of satisfying it largely. For works of fiction in general Roger
had no great fondness, though he professed an especial relish for
Thackeray. Nora had her favorites, but "The Newcomes," as yet, was not
one of them. One evening in the early spring she sat down to a twentieth
perusal of the classic tale of "The Initials." Roger, as usual, asked
her to read aloud. She began and proceeded through a dozen pages.
Looking up, at this point, she beheld Roger asleep. She smiled softly
and privately resumed her reading. At the end of an hour, Roger, having
finished his nap, rather startled her by his excessive annoyance at his
lapse of consciousness. He wondered whether he had snored, but the
absurd fellow was ashamed to ask her. Recovering himself finally: "The
fact is, Nora," he said, "all novels seem to me stupid. They are nothing
to what I can fancy! I have in my heart a prettier romance than any of
them."

 "A romance?" said Nora, simply. "Pray let me hear it. You're quite
as good a hero as this poor Mr. Hamilton. Begin!"

He stood before the fire, looking at her with almost funereal gravity.
"My denouement is not yet written," he said. "Wait till the story is
finished; then you shall hear the whole."

As at this time Nora put on long dresses and began to arrange her hair
as a young lady, it occurred to Roger that he might make some change in
his own appearance and reinforce his waning attractions. He was now
thirty-two; he fancied he was growing stout. Bald, corpulent,
middle-aged -- at this rate he would soon be shelved! He was seized with a
mad desire to win back the lost graces of youth. He had a dozen
interviews with his tailor, the result of which was that for a fortnight
he appeared daily in a new garment. Suddenly amid this restless longing
to revise and embellish himself, he determined to suppress his whiskers.
This would take off five years. He appeared, therefore, one morning, in
the severe simplicity of a mustache. Nora started and greeted him with a
little cry of horror. "Don't you like it?" he asked.

She hung her head on one side and the other. "Well no -- to be frank."

"Oh, of course to be frank! It will only take five years to grow them
again. What's the trouble?"

She gave a critical frown. "It makes you look too -- too fat; too much
like Mr. Vose." It is sufficient to explain that Mr. Vose was the
butcher, who called every day in his cart, and who recently -- Roger with
horror only now remembered it -- had sacrificed his whiskers to a greater
singleness of effect.

"I'm sorry!" said Roger. "It was for you I did it!"

"For me!" And Nora burst into a violent laugh.

"Why, my dear Nora," cried the young man with a certain angry vehemence,
"don't I do everything in life for you?"

She relapsed into sudden gravity. And then, after much meditation:
"Excuse my unfeeling levity," she said. "You might cut off your nose,
Roger, and I should like your face as well." But this was but half
comfort. "Too fat!" Her subtler sense had spoken, and Roger never
encountered Mr. Vose for three months after this without wishing to
attack him with one of his own cleavers.

He made now an heroic attempt to scale the frowning battlements of the
future. He pretended to be making arrangements for a tour in Europe, and
for having his house completely remodelled in his absence; noting the
while attentively the effect upon Nora of his cunning machinations. But
she gave no sign of suspicion that his future, to the uttermost day,
could be anything but her future too. One evening, nevertheless, an
incident occurred which fatally confounded his calculations, -- an evening
of perfect mid-spring, full of warm, vague odors, of growing day-light,
of the sense of bursting sap and fresh-turned earth. Roger sat on the
piazza, looking out on things with an opera-glass. Nora, who had been
strolling in the garden, returned to the house and sat down on the steps
of the portico. "Roger," she said, after a pause, "has it never struck
you as very strange that we should be living together in this way?"

Roger's heart rose to his throat. But he was loath to concede anything
to her imagination, lest he should concede too much. "It's not
especially strange," he said.

"Surely it is strange," she answered. "What are you? Neither my
brother, nor my father, nor my uncle, nor my cousin, -- nor even, by law,
my guardian."

"By law! My dear child, what do you know about law?"

"I know that if I should run away and leave you now, you couldn't force
me to return."

"That's fine talk! Who told you that?"

"No one; I thought of it myself.  As I grow older, I ought to think
of such things."

"Upon my word! Of running away and leaving me?"

"That's but one side of the question. The other is that you can turn me
out of your house this moment, and no one can force you to take me back.
I ought to remember such things."

"Pray what good will it do you to remember them?"

Nora hesitated a moment. "There is always some good in not losing sight
of the truth."

"The truth! you're very young to begin to talk about it."

"Not too young. I'm old for my age. I ought to be!" These last words
were uttered with a little sigh which roused Roger to action.

"Since we're talking about the truth," he said, "I wonder whether you
know a tithe of it."

For an instant she was silent; then rising slowly to her feet: "What do
you mean?" she asked. "Is there any secret in all that you've done for
me?" Suddenly she clasped her hands, and eagerly, with a smile, went on:
"You said the other day you had a romance. Is it a real romance, Roger?
Are you, after all, related to me, -- my cousin, my brother?"

He let her stand before him, perplexed and expectant. "It's more of a
romance than that."

She slid upon her knees at his feet. "Dear Roger, do tell me," she said.

He began to stroke her hair. "You think so much," he answered; "do you
never think about the future, the real future, ten years hence?"

"A great deal."

"What do you think?"

She blushed a little, and then he felt that she was drawing confidence
from the steady glow of his benignant eyes. "Promise not to laugh!" she
said, half laughing herself. He nodded. "I think about my husband!" she
proclaimed. And then, as if she had, after all, been very absurd, and to
forestall his laughter: "And about your wife!" she quickly added. "I
want dreadfully to see her. Why don't you marry?"

He continued to stroke her hair in silence. At last he said
sententiously: "I hope to marry one of these days."

"I wish you'd do it now," Nora went on. "If only she'd be nice! We
should be sisters, and I should take care of the children."

"You're too young to understand what you say, or what I mean. Little
girls shouldn't talk about marriage. It can mean nothing to you until
you come yourself to marry -- as you will, of course. You'll have to
decide and choose."

"I suppose I shall. I shall refuse him."

"What do you mean?"

But without answering his question: "Were you ever in love, Roger?" she
suddenly asked. "Is that your romance?"

"Almost."

"Then it's not about me, after all?"

"It's about you, Nora; but, after all, it's not a romance. It's solid,
it's real, it's truth itself; as true as your silly novels are false.
Nora, I care for no one, I shall never care for any one, but you!"

He spoke in tones so deep and solemn that she was impressed. "Do you
mean, Roger, that you care so much for me that you'll never marry?"

He rose quickly in his chair, pressing his hand over his brow. "Ah,
Nora," he cried, "you're terrible!"

Evidently she had pained him; her heart was filled with the impulse of
reparation. She took his two hands in her own. "Roger," she whispered
gravely, "if you don't wish it, I promise never, never, never to marry,
but to be yours alone -- yours alone!"


The summer passed away; Nora was turned sixteen. Deeming it time she
should begin to see something of the world, Roger spent the autumn in
travelling. Of his tour in Europe he  had ceased to talk; it was
indefinitely deferred. It matters little where they went; Nora vastly
enjoyed the excursion and found all spots alike delightful. For Roger,
too, it was full of a certain reassuring felicity. His remoter visions
were merged in the present overflow of sympathy and pride, in his happy
sense of her quickened observation and in the gratified vanity of
possession. Whether or no she was pretty, people certainly looked at
her. He overheard them a dozen times call her "striking." Striking!
The word seemed to him rich in meaning; if he had seen her for the first
time taking the breeze on the deck of a river steamer, he certainly
would have been struck. On his return home he found among his letters
the following missive: -- 

My dear Sir: I have learned, after various fruitless researches, that
you have adopted my cousin. Miss Lambert, at the time she left St.
Louis, was too young to know much about her family, or even to care
much; and you, I suppose, have not investigated the subject. You,
however, better than any one, can understand my desire to make her
acquaintance. I hope you'll not deny me the privilege. I am the second
son of a half-sister of her mother, between whom and my own mother there
was always the greatest affection. It was not until some time after it
happened that I heard of Mr. Lambert's melancholy death. But it is
useless to recur to that painful scene! I resolved to spare no trouble
in ascertaining the fate of his daughter. I have only just succeeded,
after having fairly given her up. I have thought it better to write to
you than to her, but I beg you to give her my compliments. I anticipate
no difficulty in satisfying you that I am not a humbug. I have no hope
of being able to better her circumstances; but, whatever they may be,
blood is blood, and cousins are cousins, especially in the West. A
speedy answer will oblige

Yours truly, George Fenton.

The letter was dated in New York, from a hotel. Roger was shocked. It
had been from the first a peculiar satisfaction to him that Nora began
and ended so distinctly with herself. But here was a hint of indefinite
continuity! Here, at last, was an echo of her past. He immediately
showed the letter to Nora. As she read it, her face flushed deep with
wonder and suppressed relief. She had never heard, she confessed, of her
mother's half-sister. The "great affection" between the two ladies must
have been anterior to Mrs. Lambert's marriage. Roger's own provisional
solution of the problem was that Mrs. Lambert had married so little to
the taste of her family as to forfeit all communication with them. If he
had obeyed his immediate impulse, he would have written to his
mysterious petitioner that Miss Lambert was sensible of the honor
implied in his request, but that never having missed his society, it
seemed needless that, at this time of day, she should cultivate it. But
Nora had become infected by a huge curiosity; the dormant pulse of
kinship had been quickened; it began to throb with delicious power. This
was enough for Roger. "I don't know," he said, "whether he's an honest
man or a scamp, but at a venture I suppose I must invite him down." To
this Nora replied that she thought his letter was "lovely"; and Mr.
Fenton received a fairly civil summons.

Whether or no he was an honest man remained to be seen; but on the face
of the matter he appeared no scamp. He was, in fact, a person difficult
to classify. Roger had made up his mind that he would be outrageously
rough and Western; full of strange oaths and bearded, for aught he knew,
like the pard. In aspect, however, Fenton was a pretty fellow enough,
and his speech, if not especially conciliatory to ears polite, possessed
a certain homely vigor in which ears polite might have found their
account. He was as little as possible, certainly, of Roger's monde;
but he carried about him the native fragrance of another  monde,
beside which the social perfume familiar to Roger's nostrils must have
seemed a trifle stale and insipid. He was invested with a loose-fitting
cosmopolitan Occidentalism, which seemed to say to Roger that, of the
two, he was provincial. Whether or no Fenton was a good man, he was a
good American; though I doubt that he would, after the saying, have
sought his Mahomet's Paradise in Paris. Considering his years, -- they
numbered but twenty-five, -- Fenton's precocity and maturity of tone were
an amazing spectacle. You would have very soon confessed, however, that
he had a true genius for his part, and that it became him better to play
at manhood than at juvenility. He could never have been a ruddy-cheeked
boy. He was tall and lean, with a keen dark eye, a smile humorous, but
not exactly genial, a thin, drawling, almost feminine voice and a
strange Southwestern accent. His voice, at first, might have given you
certain presumptuous hopes as to a soft spot in his tough young hide;
but after listening awhile to its colorless monotone, you would have
felt, I think, that though it was an instrument of one string, that
solitary chord had been tempered in brine. Fenton was furthermore
flat-chested and high-shouldered, but without any look of debility. He
wore a little dead black mustache, which, at first, you would have been
likely to suspect unjustly of a borrowed tint. His straight black hair
was always carefully combed, and a small diamond pin adorned the bosom
of his shirt. His feet were small and slender, and his left hand was
decorated with a neat specimen of tattooing. You would never have called
him modest, yet you would hardly have called him impudent; for he had
evidently lived with people among whom the ideas of modesty and
impudence, in their finer shades, had no great circulation. He had
nothing whatever of the manner of society, but it was surprising how
gracefully a certain shrewd bonhomie and smart good-humor enabled him to
dispense with it. He stood with his hands in his pockets, watching
punctilio taking its course, and thinking, probably, what a d -- d fool
she was to go so far roundabout to a point he could reach with a single
shuffle of his long legs. Roger, from the first hour of his being in the
house, felt pledged to dislike him. He patronized him; he made him feel
like a small boy, like an old woman; he sapped the roots of the poor
fellow's comfortable consciousness of being a man of the world. Fenton
was a man of twenty worlds. He had knocked about and dabbled in affairs
and adventures since he was ten years old; he knew the American
continent as he knew the palm of his hand; he was redolent of
enterprise, of "operations," of a certain fierce friction with mankind.
Roger would have liked to believe that he doubted his word, that there
was a chance of his not being Nora's cousin, but a youth of an ardent
swindling genius who had come into possession of a parcel of facts too
provokingly pertinent to be wasted. He had evidently known the late Mr.
Lambert -- the poor man must have had plenty of such friends; but was he,
in truth, his wife's nephew? Was not this shadowy nepotism excogitated
over an unpaid hotel bill? So Roger fretfully meditated, but generally
with no great gain of ground. He inclined, on the whole, to believe the
young man's pretensions were valid, and to reserve his mistrust for the
use he might possibly make of them. Of course Fenton had not come down
to spend a stupid week in the country out of pure cousinly affection.
Nora was but the means; Roger's presumptive wealth and bounty were the
end. "He comes to make love to his cousin, and marry her if he can. I,
who have done so much, will of course do more; settle an income directly
on the bride, make my will in her favor, and die at my earliest
convenience! How furious he must be," Roger continued to meditate, "to
find me so young and hearty! How furious he would be if he knew a little
more!" This line of argument was  justified in a manner by the
frank assurance which Fenton was constantly at pains to convey, that he
was incapable of any other relation to a fact than a desire to turn it
to pecuniary account. Roger was uneasy, yet he took a certain comfort in
the belief that, thanks to his early lessons, Nora could be trusted to
confine her cousin to the precinct of cousinship. In whatever he might
have failed, he had certainly taught her to know a gentleman. Cousins
are born, not made; but lovers may be accepted at discretion. Nora's
discretion, surely, would not be wanting. I may add also that, in his
desire to order all things well, Roger caught himself wondering whether,
at the worst, a little precursory love-making would do any harm. The
ground might be gently tickled to receive his own sowing; the petals of
the young girl's nature, playfully forced apart, would leave the golden
heart of the flower but the more accessible to his own vertical rays.

It was cousinship for Nora, certainly; but cousinship was much, more
than Roger fancied, luckily for his peace of mind. In the utter penury
of her native gifts, her tardy kinsman acquired a portentous value. She
was so proud of turning out to have a cousin as well as other folks,
that she lavished on the young man all the idle tenderness of her
primitive instincts, the savings and sparings, such as they were, of her
girlish good-will. It must be said that Fenton was not altogether
unworthy of her favors. He meant no especial harm to other people, save
in so far as he meant uncompromising benefit to himself. The Knight of
La Mancha, on the torrid flats of Spain, never urged his gaunt steed
with a grimmer pressure of the knees than that with which Fenton held
himself erect on the hungry hobby of success. Shrewd as he was, he had
perhaps, as well, a ray of Don Quixote's divine obliquity of vision. It
is at least true that success as yet had been painfully elusive, and a
part of the peril to Nora's girlish heart lay in this melancholy grace
of undeserved failure. The young man's imagination was a trifle
restless; he had a generous need of keeping too many irons on the fire.
It had been in a kind of fanciful despair of doing better, for the time,
that he had made overtures to Roger. He had learned six months before of
his cousin's situation and had felt no great sentimental need of making
her acquaintance; but at last, revolving many things of a certain sort,
he had come to wonder whether these good people couldn't be induced to
play into his hands. Roger's wealth (which he largely overestimated) and
Roger's obvious taste for sharing it with other people, Nora's innocence
and Nora's prospects -- it would surely take a great fool not to pluck the
rose from so thornless a tree. He foresaw these good things melting and
trickling into the shallow current of his own career. Exactly what use
he meant to make of Nora he would have been at a loss to say. Plain
matrimony might or might not be a prize. At any rate, it could do a
clever man no harm to have a rich girl foolishly in love with him. He
turned, therefore, upon his charming cousin the sunny side of his
genius. He very soon began to doubt that he had ever known so delightful
a person, and indeed his growing sense of her sweetness bade fair to
make him bungle his naughtiness. She was altogether sweet enough to be
valued for herself. She made him feel that he had never encountered a
really fine girl. Nora was a young lady: how she had come to it was one
of the outer mysteries; but there she was, consummate! He made no point
of a man being a gentleman; in fact, when a man was a gentleman you had
rather to be one yourself, which didn't pay; but for a woman to be a
lady was plainly pure gain. He had a fine enough sense to detect
something extremely grateful in the half-concessions, the reserve of
freshness, the fugitive dignity, of gently nurtured maidenhood. Women,
to him, had seemed mostly as cut flowers,  blooming awhile in the
waters of occasion, but yielding no second or rarer freshness. Nora was
fast overtaking herself in the exhilarating atmosphere of her cousin's
gallantry. She had known so few young men that she had not learned to be
fastidious, and Fenton represented to her fancy that great collective
manhood of which Roger was not. He had an irresistible air of action,
alertness, and purpose. Poor Roger, beside him, was most prosaically
passive. She regarded her cousin with something of the thrilled
attention which one bestows on the naked arrow, poised across the bow.
He had, moreover, the inestimable merit of representing her own side of
her situation. He very soon became sensible of this merit, and you may
be sure he entertained her to the top of her bent. He gossiped by the
hour about her father, and gave her very plainly to understand that poor
Mr. Lambert had been more sinned against than sinning. His wrongs, his
sufferings, his ambitions and adventures, formed on Fenton's lips not
only a most pathetic recital, but a standing pretext for Western
anecdotes, not always strictly adapted, it must be confessed, to the
melting mood. Of her mother, too, he discoursed with a wholesale
fecundity of praise and reminiscence. Facts, facts, facts was Nora's
demand: she got them, and if here and there a fiction slipped into the
basket, it passed muster with the rest.

Nora was not slow to perceive that Roger had no love for their guest,
and she immediately conceded him his right of judgment. She allowed for
a certain fatal and needful antagonism in their common interest in
herself. Fenton's presence was a tacit infringement of Roger's
prescriptive right of property. If her cousin had only never come! It
might have been, though she could not bring herself to wish it. Nora
felt vaguely that here was a chance for tact, for the woman's
peace-making art. To keep Roger in spirits, she put on a dozen unwonted
graces; she waited on him, appealed to him, smiled at him with unwearied
iteration. But the main effect of these sweet offices was to deepen her
gracious radiance in her cousin's eyes. Roger's rancorous suspicion
transmuted to bitterness what would otherwise have been pure delight.
She was turning hypocrite; she was throwing dust in his eyes; she was
plotting with that vulgar Missourian. Fenton, of course, was forced to
admit that he had reckoned without his host. Roger had had the impudence
not to turn out a simpleton; he was not a shepherd of the golden age; he
was a dogged modern, with prosy prejudices; the wind of his favor blew
as it listed. Fenton took the liberty of being extremely irritated at
the other's want of ductility. "Hang the man!" he said to himself, "why
can't he trust me? What is he afraid of? Why don't he take me as a
friend rather than an enemy? Let him be frank, and I'll be frank. I
could put him up to things! And what does he want to do with Nora, any
way?" This latter question Fenton came very soon to answer, and the
answer amused him not a little. It seemed to him an extremely odd use of
one's time and capital, this fashioning of a wife to order. There was in
it a long-winded patience, a broad arrogance of leisure, which excited
his ire. Roger might surely have found his fit ready made! His
disappointment, a certain angry impulse to rescue his cousin from this
pitiful compression of circumstance, the sense finally that what he
should gain he would gain from her alone, though indeed she was too
confoundedly innocent to appreciate his fierce immediate ends; -- these
things combined to heat the young man's humor to the fever-point and to
make him strike more random blows than belonged to plain prudence.

The autumn being well advanced, the warmth of the sun had become very
grateful. Nora used to spend much of the morning in strolling about the
dismantled garden with her cousin. Roger would stand at the window with
 his honest face more nearly disfigured by a scowl than ever
before. It was the old, old story, to his mind: nothing succeeds with
women like just too little deference. Fenton would lounge along by
Nora's side, with his hands in his pockets, a cigar in his mouth, his
shoulders raised to his ears, and a pair of tattered slippers on his
absurdly diminutive feet. Not only had Nora forgiven him this last
breach of civility, but she had forthwith begun to work him a new pair
of slippers. "What on earth," thought Roger, "do they find to talk
about?" Their conversation, meanwhile, ran in some such strain as this: -- 

"My dear Nora," said the young man, "what on earth, week in and week
out, do you and Mr. Lawrence find to talk about?"

"A great many things, George. We have lived long enough together to have
a great many interests in common."

"It was a most extraordinary thing, his adopting you, if you don't mind
my saying so. Imagine my adopting a little girl."

"You and Roger are very different men."

"We certainly are. What in the world did he expect to do with you?"

"Very much what he has done, I suppose. He has educated me, he has made
me what I am."

"You're a very nice little person; but, upon my word, I don't see that
he's to thank for it. A lovely girl can be neither made nor marred."

"Possibly! But I give you notice that I'm not a lovely girl. I have it
in me to be, under provocation, anything but a lovely girl. I owe
everything to Roger. You must say nothing against him. I won't have it.
What would have become of me -- " She stopped, betrayed by her glance and
voice.

"Mr. Lawrence is a model of all the virtues, I admit! But, Nora, I
confess I'm jealous of him. Does he expect to educate you forever? You
seem to me to have already all the learning a pretty woman needs. What
does he know about women? What does he expect to do with you two or
three years hence? Two or three years hence, you'll be -- " And Fenton,
breaking off, began to whistle with vehement gayety and executed with
shuffling feet a momentary fandango. "Two or three years hence, when you
look in the glass, remember I said so!"

"He means to go to Europe one of these days," said Nora, laughing.

"One of these days! One would think he expects to keep you forever. Not
if I can help it. And why Europe, in the name of all that's patriotic?
Europe be hanged! You ought to come out to your own section of the
country, and see your own people. I can introduce you to the best people
in St. Louis. It's a glorious place, worth a thousand of your dismal
Bostons. I'll tell you what, my dear. You don't know it, but you're a
regular Western girl."

A certain foolish gladness in being the creature thus denominated
prompted Nora to a gush of momentary laughter, of which Roger, within
the window, caught the soundless ripple. "You ought to know, George,"
she said, "you're Western enough yourself."

"Of course I am. I glory in it. It's the only place for a man of ideas!
In the West you can do something! Round here you're all stuck fast in a
Slough of Despond. For yourself, Nora, at bottom you're all right; but
superficially you're just a trifle overstarched. But we'll take it out
of you! It comes of living with stiff-necked -- "

Nora bent for a moment her lustrous eyes on the young man, as if to
recall him to order. "I beg you to understand, once for all," she said,
"that I refuse to listen to disrespectful allusions to Roger."

"I'll say it again, just to make you look at me so. If I ever fall in
love with you, it will be when you are scolding me. All I've got to do
is to attack your papa -- "

"He's not my papa. I have had  one papa; that's enough. I say it in
all respect."

"If he's not your papa, what is he? He's a dog in the manger. He must be
either one thing or the other. When you're very little older, you'll
understand that."

"He may be whatever thing you please. I shall be but one, -- his best
friend."

Fenton laughed with a kind of fierce hilarity. "You're so innocent, my
dear, that one doesn't know where to take you. You expect, in other
words, to marry him?"

Nora stopped in the path, with her eyes on her cousin. For a moment he
was half confounded by their startled severity and the flush of pain in
her cheek. "Marry Roger!" she said with great gravity.

"Why, he's a man, after all!"

Nora was silent a moment; and then with a certain forced levity, walking
on: "I'd better wait till I'm asked."

"He'll ask you! You'll see."

"If he does, I shall be surprised."

"You'll pretend to be. Women always do."

"He has known me as a child," she continued, heedless of his sarcasm. "I
shall always be a child, for him."

"He'll like that," said Fenton, with heat. "He'll like a child of twenty."

Nora, for an instant, was sunk in meditation. "As regards marriage," she
said at last, with a slightly defiant emphasis, "I'll do what Roger
wishes."

Fenton lost patience. "Roger be hanged!" he cried. "You're not his
slave. You must choose for yourself and act for yourself. You must obey
your own heart. You don't know what you're talking about. One of these
days your heart will say its say. Then we'll see what becomes of Roger's
wishes! If he wants to mould you to his will, he should have taken you
younger -- or older! Don't tell me seriously that you can ever love (don't
play upon words: love, I mean, in the one sense that means anything!)
such a solemn little fop as that! Don't protest, my dear girl; I must
have my say. I speak in your own interest; I speak, at any rate, from my
own heart. I detest the man. I came here in all deference and honesty,
and he has treated me as if I weren't fit to touch with a tongs. I'm
poor, I've my way to make, I'm on the world; but I'm an honest man, for
all that, and as good as he, take me altogether. Why can't he show me a
moment's frankness? Why can't he take me by the hand and say, Come,
young man, I've got capital, and you've got brains; let's pull together
a stroke.' Does he think I want to steal his spoons or pick his pocket?
Is that hospitality? If that's the way they understand it hereabouts, I
prefer the Western article!"

This passionate outbreak, prompted in about equal measure by baffled
ambition and wounded sensibility, made sad havoc with Nora's strenuous
loyalty to her friend. Her sense of infinite property in her cousin -- the
instinct of free affection alternating more gratefully than she knew
with the dim consciousness of measured dependence -- had become in her
heart a sort of boundless and absolute rapture. She desired neither to
question nor to set a term to it: she only knew that while it lasted it
was potently sweet. Roger's mistrust was certainly cruel; it was
crueller still that he should obtrude it on poor George's notice. She
felt, however, that two angry men were muttering over her head and her
main desire was to avert an explosion. She promised herself to dismiss
Fenton the next day. Of course, by the very fact of this concession,
Roger lost ground in her tenderness, and George acquired the grace of
the persecuted. Meanwhile, Roger's jealous irritation came to a head. On
the evening following the little scene I have narrated the young couple
sat by the fire in the library; Fenton on a stool at his cousin's feet
holding, while Nora wound them on reels, the wools which were to be
applied to the manufacture of those invidious slippers. Roger, after
grimly watching their mutual amenities for  some time over the
cover of a book, unable to master his fierce discomposure, departed with
a tell-tale stride. They heard him afterwards walking up and down the
piazza, where he was appealing from his troubled nerves to the ordered
quietude of the stars.

"He hates me so," said Fenton, "that I believe if I were to go out there
he'd draw a knife on me."

"O George!" cried Nora, horrified.

"It's a fact, my dear. I'm afraid you'll have to give me up. I wish I
had never seen you!"

"At all events, we can write to each other."

"What's writing? I don't know how to write! I will, though! I suppose
he'll open my letters. So much the worse for him!"

Nora, as she wound her spool, mused intently. "I can't believe he really
grudges me our friendship. It must be something else."

Fenton, with a clinch of his fist, arrested suddenly the outflow of the
skein from his hand. "It is something else," he said. "It's our
possible -- more than friendship!" And he grasped her two hands in his
own. "Nora, choose! Between me and him!"

She stared a moment; then her eyes filled with tears. "O George," she
cried, "you make me very unhappy." She must certainly tell him to go;
and yet that very movement of his which had made it doubly needful made
it doubly hard. "I'll talk to Roger," she said. "No one should be
condemned unheard. We may all misunderstand each other."

Fenton, half an hour later, having, as he said, letters to write, went
up to his own room; shortly after which, Roger returned to the library.
Half an hour's communion with the star-light and the long beat of the
crickets had drawn the sting from his irritation. There came to him,
too, a mortifying sense of his guest having outdone him in civility.
This would never do. He took refuge in imperturbable good-humor, and
entered the room with a bravado of cool indifference. But even before
he had spoken, something in Nora's face caused this wholesome dose of
resignation to stick in his throat. "Your cousin's gone?" he said.

"To his own room. He has some letters to write."

"Shall I hold your wools?" Roger asked, after a pause, with a rather
awkward air of overture.

"Thank you. They are all wound."

"For whom are your slippers?" He knew, of course; but the question came.

"For George. Didn't I tell you? Aren't they pretty?" And she held up her
work.

"Prettier than he deserves."

Nora gave him a rapid glance and miscounted her stitch. "You don't like
poor George," she said.

"Poor George" set his wound a-throbbing again. "No. Since you ask me, I
don't like poor George."

Nora was silent. At last: "Well!" she said, "you've not the same reasons
as I have."

"So I'm bound to believe!" cried Roger, with a laugh. "You must have
excellent reasons."

"Excellent. He's my own, you know."

"Your own --  Oho!" And he laughed louder.

His tone forced Nora to blush. "My own cousin," she cried.

"Your own fiddlestick!" cried Roger.

She stopped her work. "What do you mean?" she asked gravely.

Roger himself began to blush a little. "I mean -- I mean -- that I don't
half believe in your cousin. He doesn't satisfy me. I don't like him.
He's a jumble of contradictions. I have nothing but his own word. I'm
not bound to take it. He tells the truth, if you like, but he tells fibs
too."

"Roger, Roger," said Nora, with great softness, "do you mean that he's
an impostor?"

"The word is your own. He's not honest."

She slowly rose from her little bench,  gathering her work into the
skirt of her dress. "And, doubting of his honesty, you've let him take
up his abode here, you've let him become dear to me?"

She was making him ten times a fool! "Why, if you liked him," he said.
"When did I ever refuse you anything?"

There came upon Nora a sudden unpitying sense that then and there Roger
was ridiculous. "Honest or not honest," she said with vehemence, "I do
like him. Cousin or no cousin, he's my friend."

"Very good. But I warn you. I don't enjoy talking to you thus. But let
me tell you, once for all, that your cousin, your
friend, -- your -- whatever he is!" -- He faltered an instant; Nora's eyes
were fixed on him. "That he disgusts me!"

"You're extremely unjust. You've taken no trouble to know him. You've
treated him from the first with small civility!"

"Good heavens! Was the trouble to be all mine? Civility! he never missed
it; he doesn't know what it means."

"He knows more than you think. But we must talk no more about him." She
rolled together her canvas and reels; and then suddenly, with passionate
inconsequence, "Poor, poor George!" she cried.

Roger watched her, rankling with that unsatisfied need, familiar alike
to good men and bad when vanity is at stake, of smothering feminine
right in hard manly fact. "Nora," he said, cruelly, "you disappoint me."

"You must have formed great hopes of me!" she cried.

"I confess I had."

"Say good by to them then, Roger. If this is wrong, I'm all wrong!" She
spoke with a rich displeasure which transformed with admirable effect
her habitual expression of docility. She had never yet come so near
being beautiful. In the midst of his passionate vexation he admired her.
The scene seemed for a moment a bad dream, from which, with a start, he
might awake into a declaration of love.

"Your anger gives an admirable point to your remarks. Indeed, it gives a
beauty to your face. Must a woman be in the wrong to be charming?" He
went on, hardly knowing what he said. But a burning blush in her cheeks
recalled him to a kind of self-abhorrence. "Would to God," he cried,
"your abominable cousin had never come between us!"

"Between us? He's not between us. I stand as near you, Roger, as I ever
did. Of course George will leave immediately."

"Of course! I'm not so sure. He will, I suppose, if he's asked."

"Of course I shall ask him."

"Nonsense. You'll not enjoy that."

"We're old friends by this time," said Nora, with terrible malice. "I
shan't in the least mind."

Roger could have choked himself. He had brought his case to this: Fenton
a martyred proscript, and Nora a brooding victim of duty. "Do I want to
turn the man out of the house?" he cried. "Do me a favor, -- I demand it.
Say nothing to him, let him stay as long as he pleases. I'm not afraid!
I don't trust him, but I trust you. I'm curious to see how long he'll
have the hardihood to stay. A fortnight hence, I shall be justified.
You'll say to me, Roger, you were right. George isn't a gentleman.
There! I insist."

"A gentleman? Really, what are we talking about? Do you mean that he
wears a false diamond in his shirt? He'll take it off if I ask him.
There's a long way between wearing false diamonds -- "

"And stealing real ones! I don't know. I have always fancied they go
together. At all events, Nora, he's not to suspect that he has been able
to make trouble between two old friends."

Nora stood for a moment in irresponsive meditation. "I think he means to
go," she said. "If you want him to stay, you must ask him." And without
further words she marched out of the room. Roger followed her with 
his eyes. He thought of Lady Castlewood in "Henry Esmond," who looked
"devilish handsome in a passion."

Lady Castlewood, meanwhile, ascended to her own room, flung her work
upon the floor, and, dropping into a chair, betook herself to weeping.
It was late before she slept. She awoke with a keener consciousness of
the burden of life. Her own burden certainly was small, but her
strength, as yet, was untested. She had thought, in her many reveries,
of a possible rupture of harmony with Roger, and prayed that it might
never come by a fault of hers. The fault was hers now in that she had
surely cared less for duty than for joy. Roger, indeed, had shown a
pitiful smallness of view. This was a weakness; but who was she, to keep
account of Roger's weaknesses? It was to a weakness of Roger's that she
owed her food and raiment and shelter. It helped to quench her
resentment that she felt, somehow, that, whether Roger smiled or
frowned, George would still be George. He was not a gentleman: well and
good; neither was she, for that matter, a lady. But a certain manful
hardness like George's would not be amiss in the man one was to love.
There was a discord now in that daily commonplace of happiness which had
seemed to repeat the image of their mutual trust as a lucid pool
reflects the cloudless blue. But if the discord should deepen and swell,
it was sweet to think she might deafen her sense in that sturdy cousinship.

A simpler soul than Fenton's might have guessed at the trouble of this
quiet household. Fenton read in it as well an omen of needful
departure. He accepted the necessity with an acute sense of
failure, -- almost of injury. He had gained nothing but the bother of
being loved. It was a bother, because it gave him a vague importunate
sense of responsibility. It seemed to fling upon all things a gray shade
of prohibition. Yet the matter had its brightness, too, if a man could
but swallow his superstitions. He cared for Nora quite enough to tell
her he loved her; he had said as much, with an easy conscience, to girls
for whom he cared far less. He felt gratefully enough the cool vestment
of tenderness which she had spun about him, like a web of imponderous
silver; but he had other uses for his time than to go masquerading
through Nora's fancy. The defeat of his hope that Roger, like an ideal
oncle de comedie, would shower blessings and bank-notes upon his union
with his cousin, involved the discomfiture of a secondary project; that,
namely, of borrowing five thousand dollars. The reader will smile: but
such is the naivete of "smart men." He would consent, now, to be put
off with five hundred. In this collapse of his visions he fell a-musing
upon Nora's financial value.

"Look here," he said to her, with an air of heroic effort, "I see I'm in
the way. I must be off."

"I'm sorry, George," said Nora, sadly.

"So am I. I never supposed I was proud. But I reckoned without my host!"
he said with a bitter laugh. "I wish I had never come. Or rather I
don't. My girl of girls!"

She began to question him soothingly about his projects and prospects;
and hereupon, for once, Fenton bent his mettle to simulate a pathetic
incapacity. He set forth that he was discouraged; the future was a
blank. It was child's play, attempting to do anything without capital.

"And you have no capital?" said Nora, anxiously.

Fenton gave a poignant smile. "Why, my dear girl, I'm a poor man!"

"How poor?"

"Poor, poor, poor. Poor as a rat."

"You don't mean that you're penniless?"

"What's the use of my telling you? You can't help me. And it would only
make you unhappy."

"If you are unhappy, I want to be!"

This golden vein of sentiment might certainly be worked. Fenton took out
his pocket-book, drew from it four  bank-notes of five dollars
each, and ranged them with a sort of mournful playfulness in a line on
his knee. "That's my fortune."

"Do you mean to say that twenty dollars is all you have in the world?"

Fenton smoothed out the creases, caressingly, in the soiled and crumpled
notes. "It's a great shame to bring you down to these sordid mysteries
of misery," he said. "Fortune has raised you above them."

Nora's heart began to beat. "Yes, it has. I have a little money, George.
Some eighty dollars."

Eighty dollars! George suppressed a groan. "He keeps you rather low."

"Why, I have little use for money, and no chance, here in the country,
to spend it. Roger is extremely generous. Every few weeks he forces
money upon me. I often give it away to the poor people hereabouts. Only
a fortnight ago I refused to take any more on account of my having this
unspent. It's agreed between us that I may give what I please in
charity, and that my charities are my own affair. If I had only known of
you, George, I should have appointed you my pensioner-in-chief."

George was silent. He was wondering intently how he might arrange to
become the standing recipient of her overflow. Suddenly he remembered
that he ought to protest. But Nora had lightly quitted the room. Fenton
repocketed his twenty dollars and awaited her reappearance. Eighty
dollars was not a fortune; still it was a sum. To his great annoyance,
before Nora returned, Roger presented himself. The young man felt for an
instant as if he had been caught in an act of sentimental burglary, and
made a movement to conciliate his detector. "I'm afraid I must bid you
good by," he said.

Roger frowned and wondered whether Nora had spoken. At this moment she
reappeared, flushed and out of breath with the excitement of her
purpose. She had been counting over her money and held in each hand a
little fluttering package of bank-notes. On seeing Roger she stopped and
blushed, exchanging with her cousin a rapid glance of inquiry. He almost
glared at her, whether with warning or with menace she hardly knew.
Roger stood looking at her, half amazed. Suddenly, as the meaning of her
errand flashed upon him, he turned a furious crimson. He made a step
forward, but cautioned himself; then, folding his arms, he silently
waited. Nora, after a moment's hesitation, rolling her notes together,
came up to her cousin and held out the little package. Fenton kept his
hands in his pockets and devoured her with his eyes. "What's all this?"
he said, brutally.

"O George!" cried Nora; and her eyes filled with tears.

Roger had divined the situation; the shabby victimization of the young
girl and her kinsman's fury at the disclosure of his avidity. He was
angry; but he was even more disgusted. From so vulgar a knave there was
little rivalship to fear. "I'm afraid I'm rather a marplot," he said.
"Don't insist, Nora. Wait till my back is turned."

"I have nothing to be ashamed of," said Nora.

"You? O, nothing whatever!" cried Roger, with a laugh.

Fenton stood leaning against the mantel-piece, desperately sullen, with
a look of vicious confusion. "It's only I who have anything to be
ashamed of," he said at last, bitterly, with an effort. "My poverty!"

Roger smiled graciously, "Honest poverty is never shameful!"

Fenton gave him an insolent stare. "Honest poverty! You know a great
deal about it."

"Don't appeal to poor little Nora, man, for her savings," Roger went on.
"Come to me."

"You're unjust," said Nora. "He didn't appeal to me. I appealed to him.
I guessed his poverty. He has only twenty dollars in the world."

"O, you poor little fool!" roared Fenton's eyes.

Roger was delighted. At a single  stroke he might redeem his
incivility and reinstate himself in Nora's affections. He took out his
pocket-book. "Let me help you. It was very stupid of me not to have
guessed your embarrassment." And he counted out a dozen notes.

Nora stepped to her cousin's side and passed her hand through his arm.
"Don't be proud," she murmured caressingly.

Roger's notes were new and crisp. Fenton looked hard at the opposite
wall, but, explain it who can, he read their successive figures, -- a
fifty, four twenties, six tens. He could have howled.

"Come don't be proud," repeated Roger, holding out this little bundle of
wealth.

Two great passionate tears welled into the young man's eyes. The sight
of Roger's sturdy sleekness, of the comfortable twinkle of patronage in
his eye, was too much for him. "I shan't give you a chance to be
proud," he said. "Take care! Your papers may go into the fire."

"O George!" murmured Nora; and her murmur seemed to him delicious.

He bent down his head, passed his arm around her shoulders, and kissed
her on her forehead. "Good by, dearest Nora," he said.

Roger stood staring, with his proffered gift. "You decline?" he cried,
almost defiantly.

"Decline isn't the word. A man doesn't decline an insult."

Was Fenton, then, to have the best of it, and was his own very
generosity to be turned against him? Blindly, passionately, Roger
crumpled the notes in his fist and tossed them into the fire. In an
instant they begun to blaze.

"Roger, are you mad?" cried Nora. And she made a movement to rescue the
crackling paper. Fenton burst into a laugh. He caught her by the arm,
clasped her round the waist, and forced her to stand and watch the
brief blaze. Pressed against his side, she felt the quick beating of his
heart. As the notes disappeared her eyes sought Roger's face. He looked
at her stupidly, and then turning on his heel, he walked out of the
room. Her cousin, still holding her, showered upon her forehead half a
dozen fierce kisses. But disengaging herself: "You must leave the
house!" she cried. "Something dreadful will happen."

Fenton had soon packed his valise, and Nora, meanwhile, had ordered a
vehicle to carry him to the station. She waited for him in the portico.
When he came out, with his bag in his hand, she offered him again her
little roll of bills. But he was a wiser man than half an hour before.
He took them, turned them over and selected a one-dollar note. "I'll
keep this," he said, "in remembrance, and only spend it for my last
dinner." She made him promise, however, that if trouble really overtook
him, he would let her know, and in any case he would write. As the wagon
went over the crest of an adjoining hill he stood up and waved his hat.
His tall, gaunt young figure, as it rose dark against the cold November
sunset, cast a cooling shadow across the fount of her virgin sympathies.
Such was the outline, surely, of the conquering hero, not of the
conquered. Her fancy followed him forth into the world with a tender
impulse of comradeship.


ROGER'S quarrel with his young companion, if quarrel it was, was never
repaired. It had scattered its seed; they were left lying, to be
absorbed in the conscious soil or dispersed by some benignant breeze of
accident, as destiny might appoint. But as a manner of clearing the air
of its thunder, Roger, a week after Fenton's departure, proposed she
should go with him for a fortnight to town. Later, perhaps, they might
arrange to remain for the winter. Nora had been longing vaguely for the
relief of a change of circumstance; she assented with great good-will.
They lodged at a hotel, -- not the establishment at which they had made
acquaintance. Here, late in the afternoon, the day after their arrival,
Nora sat by the window, waiting for Roger to come and take her to
dinner, and watching with the intentness of country eyes the hurrying
throng in the street; thinking too at moments of a certain blue bonnet
she had bought that morning, and comparing it, not uncomplacently, with
the transitory bonnets on the pavement. A gentleman was introduced; Nora
had not forgotten Hubert Lawrence. Hubert had occupied for more than a
year past a pastoral office in the West, and had recently had little
communication with his cousin. Nora he had seen but on a single
occasion, that of his visit to Roger, six months after her advent. She
had grown in the interval, from the little girl who slept with the
"Child's Own Book" under her pillow and dreamed of the Prince Avenant,
into a stately maiden who read the "Heir of Redcliffe," and mused upon
the loves of the clergy. Hubert, too, had changed in his own degree. He
was now thirty-one years of age and his character had lost something of
a certain boyish vagueness of outline, which formerly had not been
without its grace. But his elder grace was scarcely less effective.
Various possible half-shadows in his personality had melted into broad,
shallow lights. He was now, distinctly, one of the light-armed troops of
the army of the Lord. He fought the Devil as an irresponsible
skirmisher, not as a sturdy gunsman planted beside a booming
sixty-pounder. The clerical cloth, as Hubert wore it, was not
unmitigated sable; and in spite of his cloth, such as it was, humanity
rather than divinity got the lion's share of his attentions. He loved
doubtless, in this world, the heavenward face of things, but he loved,
as regards heaven, the earthward. He was rather an idler in the walks of
theology and he was uncommitted to any very rigid convictions. He
thought the old theological positions in very bad taste, but he thought
the new theological negations in no taste at all. In fact, Hubert
believed so vaguely and languidly in the Devil that there was but
slender logic in his having undertaken the cure of souls. He
administered his spiritual medicines in homoeopathic doses. It had been
maliciously said that he had turned parson because parsons enjoy
peculiar advantages in approaching the fair sex. The presumption is in
their favor. Our business, however, is not to pick up idle reports.
Hubert was, on the whole, a decidedly light weight, and yet his want of
spiritual passion was by no means in effect a want of motive or
stimulus; for the central pivot of his being continued to operate with
the most noiseless precision and regularity, -- the slim, erect,
inflexible Ego. To the eyes of men, and especially to the eyes of
women, whatever may have been the moving cause, the outer manifestation
 was supremely gracious. If Hubert had no great firmness of faith,
he had a very pretty firmness of manner. He was gentle without timidity,
frank without arrogance, clever without pedantry. The common measure of
clerical disallowance was reduced in his hands to the tacit protest of a
generous personal purity. His appearance bore various wholesome traces
of the practical lessons of his Western pastorate. This had been
disagreeable; he had had to apply himself, to devote himself, to
compromise with a hundred aversions. His talents had been worth less to
him than he expected, and he had been obliged, as the French say, to
payer de sa personne, -- that person for which he entertained so
delicate a respect, -- in a peculiarly unsympathetic medium. All this had
given him a slightly jaded, overwearied look, certain to deepen his
interest in female eyes. He had actually a couple of wrinkles in his
fair seraphic forehead. He secretly rejoiced in his wrinkles. They were
his crown of glory. He had suffered, he had worked, he had been bored.
Now he believed in earthly compensations.

"Dear me!" he said, "can this be Nora Lambert?"

She had risen to meet him, and held out her hand with girlish frankness.
She was dressed in a light silk dress; she seemed altogether a young
woman. "I have been growing hard in all these years," she said. "I have
had to overtake those pieds enormes." The readers will not have
forgotten that Hubert had thus qualified her lower members. Ignorant as
she was, at the moment, of the French tongue, her memory had
instinctively retained the words, and she had taken an early opportunity
to look out pied in the dictionary. Enorme, of course, spoke for
itself.

"You must have caught up with them now," Hubert said, laughing. "You're
an enormous young lady. I should never have known you." He sat down,
asked various questions about Roger, and adjured her to tell him, as he
said, "all about herself." The invitation was flattering, but it met
only a partial compliance. Unconscious as yet of her own charm, Nora was
oppressed by a secret admiration of her companion. His presence seemed
to open a sudden vista in the narrow precinct of her young experience.
She compared him with her cousin, and wondered that he should be at once
so impressive and so different. She blushed a little, privately, for
Fenton, and was not ill-pleased to think he was absent. In the light of
Hubert's good manners, his admission that he was no gentleman acquired
an excessive force. By this thrilling intimation of the diversity of the
male sex, the mental pinafore of childhood seemed finally dismissed.
Hubert was so frank and friendly, so tenderly and gallantly patronizing,
that more than once she felt herself drifting toward an answering
freedom of confidence; but on the verge of effusion, something absent in
the tone of his assent, a vague fancy that, in the gathering dusk, he
was looking at her all at his ease, rather than listening to her,
converted her bravery into what she knew to be deplorable
little-girlishness. On the whole, this interview may have passed for
Nora's first lesson in the art, indispensable to a young lady on the
threshold of society, of talking for half an hour without saying
anything. The lesson was interrupted by the arrival of Roger, who
greeted his cousin with almost extravagant warmth, and insisted on his
staying to dinner. Roger was to take Nora after dinner to a concert, for
which he felt no great enthusiasm; he proposed to Hubert, who was a
musical man, to occupy his place. Hubert demurred awhile; but in the
mean time Nora, having gone to prepare herself, reappeared, looking
extremely well in the blue crape bonnet before mentioned, with her face
bright with anticipated pleasure. For a moment Roger was vexed at having
resigned his office: Hubert immediately stepped into it. They came home
late, the blue bonnet nothing the worse for wear, and the young girl's
face  illumined by a dozen intense impressions. She was in a fever
of gayety; she treated Roger to a representation of the concert, and
made a great show of voice. Her departing childishness, her dawning
tact, her freedom with Roger, her half-freedom with Hubert, made a
charming mixture, and insured for her auditors the success of the
entertainment. When she had retired, amid a mimic storm of applause from
the two gentlemen, Roger solemnly addressed his cousin, "Well, what do
you think of her? I hope you have no fault to find with her feet."

"I have had no observation of her feet," said Hubert; "but she will have
very handsome hands. She's a very nice creature." Roger sat lounging in
his chair with his hands in his pockets, his chin on his breast, and a
heavy gaze fixed on Hubert. The latter was struck with his deeply
preoccupied aspect. "But let us talk of you rather than of Nora," he
said. "I have been waiting for a chance to tell you that you look very
poorly."

"Nora or I, -- it's all one. Hubert, I live in that child!"

Hubert was startled by the sombre energy of his tone. The old polished
placid Roger was in abeyance. "My dear fellow," he said, "you're
altogether wrong. Live for yourself. You may be sure she'll do as much.
You take it too hard."

"Yes, I take it too hard. It wears upon me."

"What's the matter? Is she troublesome? Is she more than you bargained
for?" Roger sat gazing at him in silence, with the same grave eye. He
began to suspect Nora had turned out a losing investment. "Is
she -- a -- vicious?" he went on. "Surely not with that sweet face!"

Roger started to his feet impatiently. "Don't misunderstand me!" he
cried. "I've been longing to see some one -- to talk -- to get some
advice -- some sympathy. I'm fretting myself away."

"Good heavens, man, give her a thousand dollars and send her back to her
family. You've educated her."

"Her family! She has no family! She's the loneliest as well as the
sweetest, wisest, best of creatures! If she were only a tenth as good, I
should be a happier man. I can't think of parting with her; not for all
I possess!"

Hubert stared a moment. "Why, you're in love!"

"Yes," said Roger, blushing. "I'm in love."

"Come!"

"I'm not ashamed of it," rejoined Roger, softly.

It was no business of Hubert's certainly; but he felt the least bit
disappointed. "Well," he said, coolly, "why don't you marry her?"

"It's not so simple as that!"

"She'll not have you?"

Roger frowned impatiently. "Reflect a moment. You pretend to be a man of
delicacy."

"You mean she's too young? Nonsense. If you are sure of her, the younger
the better."

"Hubert," cried Roger, "for my unutterable misery, I have a conscience.
I wish to leave her free, and take the risk. I wish to be just, and let
the matter work itself out. You may think me absurd, but I wish to be
loved for myself, as other men are loved."

It was a specialty of Hubert's that in proportion as other people grew
hot, he grew cool. To keep cool, morally, in a heated medium was, in
fact, for Hubert a peculiar satisfaction. He broke into a long light
laugh. "Excuse me," he said, "but there is something ludicrous in your
attitude. What business has a lover with a conscience? None at all!
That's why I keep out of it. It seems to me your prerogative to be
downright. If you waste any more time in hair-splitting, you'll find
your young lady has taken things in the lump!"

"Do you really think there is danger?" Roger demanded, pitifully. "Not
yet awhile. She's only a child. Tell me, rather, is she only a child?
 You've spent the evening beside her: how does she strike a stranger?"

While Hubert's answer lingered on his lips, the door opened and Nora
came in. Her errand was to demand the use of Roger's watch-key, her own
having mysteriously vanished. She had begun to take out her pins and had
muffled herself for this excursion in a merino dressing-gown of sombre
blue. Her hair was gathered for the night into a single massive coil,
which had been loosened by the rapidity of her flight along the passage.
Roger's key proved a complete misfit, so that she had recourse to
Hubert's. It hung on the watch-chain which depended from his waistcoat,
and some rather intimate fumbling was needed to adjust it to Nora's
diminutive timepiece. It worked admirably, and she stood looking at him
with a little smile of caution as it creaked on the pivot. "I wouldn't
have troubled you," she said, "but that without my watch I should
oversleep myself. You know Roger's temper, and what I should suffer if I
were late for breakfast!"

Roger was ravished at this humorous sally, and when, on making her
escape, she clasped one hand to her head to support her released
tresses, and hurried along the corridor with the other confining the
skirts of her inflated robe, he kissed his hand after her with more than
jocular good-will.

"Ah! it's as bad as that!" said Hubert, shaking his head.

"I had no idea she had such hair," cried Roger. "You're right, it's no
case for shilly-shallying."

"Take care!" said Hubert. "She's only a child."

Roger looked at him a moment. "My dear fellow, you're a hypocrite."

Hubert colored the least bit, and then took up his hat and began to
smooth it with his handkerchief. "Not at all. See how frank I can be. I
recommend you to marry the young lady and have done with it. If you
wait, it will be at your own risk. I assure you I think she's charming,
and if I'm not mistaken, this is only a hint of future possibilities.
Don't sow for others to reap. If you think the harvest isn't ripe, let
it ripen in milder sunbeams than these vigorous hand-kisses! Lodge her
with some proper person and go to Europe; come home from Paris a year
hence with her trousseau in your trunks, and I'll perform the ceremony
without another fee than the prospect of having an adorable cousin."
With these words Hubert left his companion pensive.

His words reverberated in Roger's mind; I may almost say that they
rankled. A couple of days later, in the hope of tenderer counsel, he
called upon our friend Mrs. Keith. This lady had completely rounded the
cape of matrimony, and was now buoyantly at anchor in the placid cover
of well-dowered widowhood. I have heard many a young unmarried lady
exclaim with a bold sweep of conception, "Ah me! I wish I were a widow!"
Mrs. Keith was precisely the widow that young unmarried ladies wish to
be. With her diamonds in her dressing-case and her carriage in her
stable, and without a feather's weight of encumbrance, she offered a
finished example of satisfied ambition. Her wants had been definite;
these once gratified, she had not presumed further. She was a very much
worthier woman than in those hungry virginal days when Roger had wooed
her. Prosperity had agreed equally well with her beauty and her temper.
The wrinkles on her brow had stood still, like Joshua's sun, and a host
of good intentions and fair promises seemed to irradiate her person.
Roger, as he stood before her, not only felt that his passion was
incurably defunct, but allowed himself to doubt that this veuve
consolee would have made an ideal wife. The lady, mistaking his
embarrassment for the forms of smouldering ardor, determined to
transmute his devotion by the subtle chemistry of friendship. This she
found easy work; in ten minutes the echoes of the past were hushed in
the small-talk of the present. Mrs. Keith was on the point of sailing
for Europe,  and had much to say of her plans and arrangements, -- of
the miserable rent she was to get for her house. "Why shouldn't one turn
an honest penny?" she said. "And now," she went on, when the field had
been cleared, "tell me about the young lady." This was precisely what
Roger wished; but just as he was about to begin his story there came an
irruption of visitors, fatal to the confidential. Mrs. Keith found means
to take him aside. "Seeing is better than hearing," she said, "and I'm
dying to see her. Bring her this evening to dinner, and we shall have
her to ourselves."

Mrs. Keith had long been for Nora an object of mystical veneration.
Roger had been in the habit of alluding to her, not freely nor
frequently, but with a certain implicit homage which more than once had
set Nora wondering. She entered the lady's drawing-room that evening
with an oppressive desire to please. The interest manifested by Roger in
the question of what she should wear assured her that he had staked a
nameless something on the impression she might make. She was not only
reassured, however, but altogether captivated, by the lavish cordiality
of her hostess. Mrs. Keith kissed her on both cheeks, held her at her
two arms' length, gave a twist to the fall of her sash, and made her
feel very plainly that she was being inspected and appraised; but all
with a certain flattering light in the eye and a tender matronly smile,
which rather increased than diminished the young girl's composure. Mrs.
Keith was herself so elegant, so finished, so fragrant of taste and
sense, that before an hour was over Nora felt that she had borrowed the
hint of a dozen indispensable graces. After dinner her hostess bade her
sit down to the piano. Here, feeling sure of her ground, Nora surpassed
herself. Mrs. Keith beckoned to Roger to come and sit beside her on the
sofa, where, as she nodded time with her head, she softly conversed
under cover of the music. Prosperity, as I have intimated, had acted on
her moral nature very much as a medicinal tonic -- quinine or iron -- acts
upon the physical. She was in a comfortable glow of charity. She itched
gently, she hardly knew where, -- was it in heart or brain? -- to render
some one a service. She had on hand a small capital of sentimental
patronage for which she desired a secure investment. Here was her
chance. The project which Roger had imparted to her three years before
seemed to her, now she had taken Nora's measure, to contain such pretty
elements of success that she deemed it a sovereign pity it should not be
rounded into blissful symmetry. She determined to lend an artistic hand.
"Does she know it, that matter?" she asked in a whisper.

"I have never told her."

"That's right. I approve your delicacy. Of course you're sure of your
case. She's altogether lovely, -- she's one in a thousand. I really envy
you; upon my word, Mr. Lawrence, I'm jealous. She has a style of her
own. It's not quite beauty; it's not quite cleverness. It belongs
neither altogether to her person, nor yet to her mind. It's a sort of
tone. Time will bring it out. She has pretty things, too; one of these
days she may take it into her head to be a beauty of beauties. Nature
never meant her to hold up her head so well for nothing. Ah, how
wrinkled and becapped it makes one feel! To be sixteen years old, with
that head of hair, with health and good connections, with that amount of
good-will at the piano, it's the very best thing in the world, if they
but knew it! But no! they must leave it all behind them; they must pull
their hair to pieces, they must get rid of their complexions; they must
be twenty, they must have lovers, and go their own gait. Well, since it
must come, we must attend to the profits: they'll take care of the
lovers. Give Nora to me for a year. She needs a woman, a wise woman, a
woman like me. Men, when they undertake to meddle with a young girl's
education, are veriest old grandmothers. Let me take her to  Europe
and bring her out in Rome. Don't be afraid; I'll guard your interests.
I'll bring you back the finest girl in America. I see her from here!"
And describing a great curve in the air with her fan, Mrs. Keith
inclined her head to one side in a manner suggestive of a milliner who
descries in the bosom of futurity the ideal bonnet. Looking at Roger,
she saw that her point was gained; and Nora, having just finished her
piece, was accordingly summoned to the sofa and made to sit down at Mrs.
Keith's feet. Roger went and stood before the fire. "My dear Nora," said
Mrs. Keith, as if she had known her from childhood, "how would you like
to go with me to Rome?"

Nora started to her feet, and stood looking open-eyed from one to the
other. "Really?" she said. "Does Roger -- "

"Roger," said Mrs. Keith, "finds you so hard to manage that he has made
you over to me. I forewarn you, I'm a terrible woman. But if you are not
afraid, I shall scold you and pinch you no harder than I would a
daughter of my own."

"I give you up for a year," said Roger. "It's hard, troublesome as you
are."

Nora stood wavering for a moment, hesitating where to deposit her excess
of joy. Then graciously dropping on her knees before Mrs. Keith, she
bent her young head and exhaled it in an ample kiss. "I'm not afraid of
you," she said, simply. Roger turned round and began to poke the fire.

The next day Nora went forth to buy certain articles necessary in
travelling. It was raining so heavily that, at Roger's direction, she
took a carriage. Coming out of a shop, in the course of her expedition,
she encountered Hubert Lawrence, tramping along in the wet. He helped
her back to her carriage, and stood for a moment talking to her through
the window. As they were going in the same direction, she invited him to
get in; and on his hesitating, she added that she hoped their interview
was not to end there, as she was going to Europe with Mrs. Keith. At
this news Hubert jumped in and placed himself on the front seat. The
knowledge that she was drifting away gave a sudden value to the present
occasion. Add to this that in the light of Roger's revelation after the
concert, this passive, predestined figure of hers had acquired for the
young man a certain rich interest. Nora found herself strangely at ease
with her companion. From time to time she strove to check the headlong
course of her girlish epanouissement; but Hubert evidently, with his
broad superior gallantry, was not the person to note to a hair's value
the pitiful more or less of a school-girl's primness. Her enjoyment of
his presence, her elation in the prospect of departure, made her gayety
reckless. They went together to half a dozen shops and talked and
laughed so distractedly over her purchases, that she made them sadly at
haphazard. At last their progress was arrested by a dead-lock of
vehicles in front of them, caused by the breaking down of a horse-car.
The carriage drew up near the sidewalk in front of a confectioner's. On
Nora's regretting the delay, and saying she was ravenous for lunch,
Hubert went into the shop, and returned with a bundle of tarts. The rain
came down in sheeted torrents, so that they had to close both the
windows. Circled about with this watery screen, they feasted on their
tarts with extraordinary relish. In a short time Hubert made another
excursion, and returned with a second course. His diving to and fro in
the rain excited them to extravagant mirth. Nora had bought some
pocket-handkerchiefs, which were in that cohesive state common to these
articles in the shop. It seemed a very pretty joke to spread the piece
across their knees as a table-cloth.

"To think of picnicking in the midst of Washington Street!" cried Nora,
with her lips besprinkled with flakes of pastry.

"For a young lady about to leave her native land, her home, and friends,
and  all that's dear to her," said Hubert, "you seem to me in very
good spirits."

"Don't speak of it," said Nora. "I shall cry to-night; I know I shall."

"You'll not be able to do this kind of thing abroad," said Hubert. "Do
you know we're monstrously improper? For a young girl it's by no means
pure gain, going to Europe. She comes into a very pretty heritage of
prohibitions. You have no idea of the number of improper things a young
girl can do. You're walking on the edge of a precipice. Don't look over
or you'll lose your head and never walk straight again. Here, you're all
blindfold. Promise me not to lose this blessed bondage of American
innocence. Promise me that, when you come back, we shall spend another
morning together as free and delightful as this one!"

"I promise you!" said Nora; but Hubert's words had potently foreshadowed
the forfeiture of sweet possibilities. For the rest of the drive she was
in a graver mood. They found Roger beneath the portico of the hotel,
watch in hand, staring up and down the street. Preceding events having
been explained to him, he offered to drive his cousin home.

"I suppose Nora has told you," he began, as they proceeded.

"Yes! Well, I'm sorry. She's a charming girl."

"Ah!" Roger cried; "I knew you thought so!"

"You're as knowing as ever! She sails, she tells me, on Wednesday next.
And you, when do you sail?"

"I don't sail at all. I'm going home."

"Are you sure of that?"

Roger gazed for a moment out of the window. "I mean for a year," he
said, "to allow her perfect liberty."

"And to accept the consequences?"

"Absolutely." And Roger folded his arms.

This conversation took place on a Friday. Nora was to sail from New York
on the succeeding Wednesday; for which purpose she was to leave Boston
with Mrs. Keith on the Monday. The two ladies were of course to be
attended to the ship by Roger. Early Sunday morning Nora received a
visit from her friend. The reader will perhaps remember that Mrs. Keith
was a recent convert to the Roman Catholic faith; as such, she performed
her religious duties with peculiar assiduity. Her present errand was to
propose that Nora should go with her to church and join in offering a
mass for their safety at sea. "I don't want to undermine your faith, you
know; but I think it would be so nice," said Mrs. Keith. Appealing to
Roger, Nora received permission to do as she pleased; she therefore lent
herself with fervor to this pious enterprise. The two ladies spent an
hour at the foot of the altar, -- an hour of romantic delight to the
younger one. On Sunday evening Roger, who, as the day of separation
approached, became painfully anxious and reluctant, betook himself to
Mrs. Keith, with the desire to enforce upon her mind a solemn sense of
her responsibilities and of the value of the treasure he had confided to
her. Nora, left alone, sat wondering whether Hubert might not come to
bid her farewell. Wandering listlessly about the room, her eye fell on
the Saturday-evening paper. She took it up and glanced down the columns.
In one of them she perceived a list of the various church services of
the morrow. Last in the line stood this announcement: "At the --  --   --  -- 
Church, the Rev. Hubert Lawrence, at eight o'clock." It gave her a
gentle shock; it destroyed the vision of his coming in and their having,
under the lamp, by the fire, the serious counterpart of their frolicsome
tete-a-tete in the carriage. She longed to show him that she was not a
giggling child, but a wise young lady. But no; in a bright, crowded
church, before a hundred eyes, he was speaking of divine things. How did
he look in the pulpit? If she could only see him! And why not? She
looked at her watch; it stood at ten minutes to eight. She made no pause
to reflect; she only felt that she must hurry. She rang the bell and
ordered a carriage,  and then, hastening to her room, put on her
shawl and bonnet, -- the blue crape bonnet of the concert. In a few
moments she was on her way to the church. When she reached it, her heart
was beating fast; she was on the point of turning back. But the coachman
opened the carriage door with such a flourish, that she was ashamed not
to get out. She was late; the church was full, the hymn had been sung,
and the sermon was about to begin. The sexton with great solemnity
conducted her up the aisle to a pew directly beneath the pulpit. She
bent her eyes on the ground, but she knew that there was a deep
expectant silence, and that Hubert, in a white cravat, was upright
before the desk, looking at her. She sat down beside a very grim-visaged
old lady with bushy eyebrows, who stared at her so hard, that to hide
her confusion she buried her head and improvised a prayer; upon which
the old lady seemed to stare more intently, as if she thought her very
pretentious. When she raised her head, Hubert had begun to speak; he was
looking above her and beyond her, and during the sermon his level glance
never met her own. Of what did he speak and what was the moral of his
discourse? Nora could not have told you; yet not a soul in the audience
surely, not all those listening souls together, were more devoutly
attentive than she. But it was not on what he said, but on what he was,
or seemed to be, that her perception was centred. Hubert Lawrence had an
excellent gift of oratory. His voice was full of penetrating sweetness,
and in the bright warm air of the compact little church, modulated with
singular refinement, it resounded and sank with the cadence of ringing
silver. His speech was silver, though I doubt that his silence was ever
golden. His utterance seemed to Nora the perfection of eloquence. She
thought of her brief exaltation of the morning, in the incense-thickened
air of the Catholic church; but what a straighter flight to heaven was
this! Hubert's week-day face was a summer cloud, with a lining of
celestial brightness. Now, how the divine truth overlapped its relenting
edges and seemed to transform it into a dazzling focus of light! He
spoke for half an hour, but Nora took no note of time. As the service
drew to a close, he gave her from the pulpit a rapid glance, which she
interpreted as a request to remain. When the congregation began to
disperse, a number of persons, chiefly ladies, waited for him near the
pulpit, and, as he came down, met him with greetings and compliments.
Nora watched him from her place, listening, smiling and passing his
handkerchief over his forehead. At last they relieved him, and he came
up to her. She remembered for years afterward the strange half-smile on
his face. There was something in it like a pair of eyes peeping over a
wall. It seemed to express so fine an acquiescence in what she had done,
that, for the moment, she had a startled sense of having committed
herself to something. He gave her his hand, without manifesting any
surprise. "How did you get here?"

"In a carriage. I saw it in the paper at the last moment."

"Does Roger know you came?"

"No; he had gone to Mrs. Keith's."

"So you started off alone, at a moment's notice?"

She nodded, blushing. He was still holding her hand; he pressed it and
dropped it. "O Hubert," cried Nora, suddenly, "now I know you!"

Two ladies were lingering near, apparently mother and daughter. "I must
be civil to them," he said; "they have come from New York to hear me."
He quickly rejoined them and conducted them toward their carriage. The
younger one was extremely pretty, and looked a little like a Jewess.
Nora observed that she wore a great diamond in each ear; she eyed our
heroine rather severely as they passed. In a few minutes Hubert came
back, and, before she knew it, she had taken his arm and he was beside
her in her own carriage. They drove to the hotel in silence; he went up
stairs with her.  Roger had not returned. "Mrs. Keith is very
agreeable," said Hubert. "But Roger knew that long ago. I suppose you
have heard," he added; "but perhaps you've not heard."

"I've not heard," said Nora, but I've suspected -- "

"What?"

"No; it's for you to say."

"Why, that Mrs. Keith might have been Mrs. Lawrence."

"Ah, I was right, -- I was right," murmured Nora, with a little air of
triumph. "She may be still. I wish she would!" Nora was removing her
bonnet before the mirror over the chimney-piece; as she spoke, she
caught Hubert's eye in the glass. He dropped it and took up his hat.
"Won't you wait?" she asked.

He said he thought he had better go, but he lingered without sitting
down. Nora walked about the room, she hardly knew why, smoothing the
table-covers and rearranging the chairs.

"Did you cry about your departure, the other night, as you promised?"
Hubert asked.

"I confess that I was so tired with our adventures, that I went straight
to sleep."

"Keep your tears for a better cause. One of the greatest pleasures in
life is in store for you. There are a hundred things I should like to
say to you about Rome. How I only wish I were going to show it you! Let
me beg you to go some day to a little place in the Via Felice, on the
Pincian, -- a house with a terrace adjoining the fourth floor. There is a
plasterer's shop in the basement. You can reach the terrace by the
common staircase. I occupied the rooms adjoining it, and it was my
peculiar property. I remember I used often to share it with a poor
little American sculptress who lived below. She made my bust; the Apollo
Belvedere was nothing to it. I wonder what has become of her! Take a
look at the view, -- the view I woke up to every morning, read by, studied
by, lived by. I used to alternate my periods of sight-seeing with fits
of passionate study. In another winter I think I might have learned
something. Your real lover of Rome oscillates with a kind of delicious
pain between the city in itself and the city in literature. They keep
forever referring you to each other and bandying you to and fro. If we
had eyes for metaphysical things, Nora, you might see a hundred odd bits
of old ambitions and day-dreams strewing that little terrace. Ah, as I
sat there, how the Campagna used to take up the tale and respond to my
printed page! If I know anything of the lesson of history (a man of my
profession is supposed to), I learned it in that empurpled air! I should
like to know who's sitting in the same school now. Perhaps you'll write
me a word."

"I'll piously gather up the crumbs of your feasts and make a meal of
them," said Nora. "I'll let you know how they taste."

"Pray do. And one more request. Don't let Mrs. Keith make a Catholic of
you." And he put out his hand.

She shook her head slowly, as she took it. "I'll have no Pope but you,"
she said.

The next moment he was gone.

Roger had assured his cousin that he meant to return home, and indeed,
after Nora's departure, he spent a fortnight in the country. But finding
he had no patience left for solitude, he again came to town and
established himself for the winter. A restless need of getting rid of
time caused him to resume his earlier social habits. It began to be said
of him that now he had disposed of that queer little girl whom he had
picked up heaven knew where (whom it was certainly very good-natured of
Mrs. Keith to take off his hands), he was going to look about him for a
young person whom he might take to his home in earnest. Roger felt as if
he were now establishing himself in society in behalf of that larger
personality into which his narrow singleness  was destined to
expand. He was paving the way for Nora. It seemed to him that she might
find it an easy way to tread. He compared her attentively with every
young girl he met; many were prettier, some possessed in larger degree
the air of "brightness"; but none revealed that deep-shrined natural
force, lurking in the shadow of modesty like a statue in a recess, which
you hardly know whether to denominate humility or pride.

One evening, at a large party, Roger found himself approached by an
elderly lady who had known him from his boyhood and for whom he had a
vague traditional regard, but with whom of late years he had relaxed his
intercourse, from a feeling that, being a very worldly old woman, her
influence on Nora might be pernicious. She had never smiled on the
episode of which Nora was the heroine, and she hailed Roger's
reappearance as a sign that this episode was at an end, and that he
meant to begin to live as a man of taste. She was somewhat cynical in
her shrewdness, and, so far as she might, she handled matters without
gloves.

"I'm glad to see you have found your wits again," she said, "and that
that forlorn little orphan -- Dora, Flora, what's her name? -- hasn't
altogether made a fool of you. You want to marry; come, don't deny it.
You can no more remain unmarried than I can remain standing here. Go ask
that little man for his chair. With your means and your disposition and
all the rest of it, you ought by this time to be setting a good example.
But it's never too late to mend. J'ai votre affaire. Have you been
introduced to Miss Sandys? Who is Miss Sandys? There you are to the
life! Miss Sandys is Miss Sandys, the young lady in whose honor we are
here convened. She is staying with my sister. You must have heard of
her. New York, but good New York; so pretty that she might be as silly
as you please, yet as clever and good as if she were as plain as I.
She's everything a man can want. If you've not seen her it's
providential. Come; don't protest for the sake of protesting. I have
thought it all out. Allow me! in this matter I have a real sixth sense.
I know at a glance what will do and what won't. You're made for each
other. Come and be presented. You have just time to settle down to it
before supper."

Then came into Roger's honest visage a sort of Mephistophelian
glee, -- the momentary intoxication of duplicity. "Well, well," he said,
"let us see all that's to be seen." And he thought of his Peruvian
Teresa. Miss Sandys, however, proved no Teresa, and Roger's friend had
not overstated her merits. Her beauty was remarkable; and strangely, in
spite of her blooming maturity, something in her expression, her smile,
reminded him forcibly of Nora. So Nora might look after ten or twelve
years of evening parties. There was a hint, just a hint, of customary
triumph in the poise of her head, an air of serene success in her
carriage; but it was her especial charm that she seemed to melt downward
and condescend from this altitude of loveliness with a benignant and
considerate grace; to drop, as it were, from the zenith of her favor,
with a little shake of invitation, the silken cable of a long-drawn
smile. Roger felt that there was so little to be feared from her that he
actually enjoyed the mere surface glow of his admiration; the sense of
floating unmelted in the genial zone of her presence, like a polar
ice-block in a summer sea. The more he observed her, the more she seemed
to foreshadow his prospective Nora; so that at last, borrowing
confidence from this phantasmal identity, he addressed her with
unaffected friendliness. Miss Sandys, who was a woman of perceptions,
seeing an obviously modest man swimming, as it were, in this mystical
calm, became interested. She divined in Roger's manner an unwonted force
of admiration. She had feasted her fill on uttered flattery; but here
was a good man whose appreciation left compliments far behind. At the
end of ten minutes  Roger frankly proclaimed that she reminded him
singularly of a young girl he knew. "A young girl, forsooth," thought
Miss Sandys. "Is he coming to his fadaises, like the rest of them?"

"You're older than she," Roger added, "but I expect her to look like you
some time hence."

"I gladly bequeath her my youth, as I come to give it up."

"You can never have been plain," said Roger. "My friend, just now, is no
beauty. But I assure you, you encourage me."

"Tell me about this young lady," his companion rejoined. "It's
interesting to hear about people one looks like."

"I should like to tell you," said Roger, "but you would laugh at me."

"You do me injustice. Evidently this is a matter of sentiment. A bit of
genuine sentiment is the best thing in the world; and when I catch
myself laughing at a mortal who confesses to one, I submit to being told
that I have grown old only to grow silly."

Roger smiled approval. "I can only say," he answered, "that this young
friend of mine is, to me, the most interesting object in the world."

"In other words, you're engaged to her."

"Not a bit of it."

"Why, then, she is a deaf-mute whom you have rendered vocal, or a pretty
heathen whom you have brought to Sunday school."

Roger laughed exuberantly. "You've hit it," he said; "a deaf-mute whom I
have taught to speak. Add to that, that she was a little blind, and that
now she recognizes me with spectacles, and you'll admit that I have
reason to be proud of my work." Then after a pause he pursued,
seriously: "If anything were to happen to her -- "

"If she were to lose her faculties -- "

"I should be in despair; but I know what I should do. I should come to
you."

"O, I should be a poor substitute!"

"I should make love to you," Roger went on.

"You would be in despair indeed. But you must bring me some supper."

Half an hour later, as the ladies were cloaking themselves, Mrs.
Middleton, who had undertaken Roger's case, asked Miss Sandys for her
impressions. These seemed to have been highly propitious. "He is not a
shining light perhaps," the young lady said, "but he has the real moral
heat that one so seldom meets. He's in earnest; after what I have been
through, that's very pleasant. And by the way, what is this little deaf
and dumb girl in whom he is interested?"

Mrs. Middleton stared. "I never heard she was deaf and dumb. Very
likely. He adopted her and brought her up. He has sent her abroad -- to
learn the languages!"

Miss Sandys mused as they descended the stairs. "He's a good man," she
said. "I like him."

It was in consequence, doubtless, of this last remark that Roger, the
next morning, received a note from his friend. "You have made a hit; I
shall never forgive you, if you don't follow it up. You have only to be
decently civil and then propose. Come and dine with me on Wednesday. I
shall have only one guest. You know I always take a nap after dinner."

The same post that brought Mrs. Middleton's note brought him a letter
from Nora. It was dated from Rome, and ran as follows: -- 

"I hardly know, dearest Roger, whether to begin with an apology or a
scolding. We have each something to forgive, but you have certainly
least. I have before me your two poor little notes, which I have been
reading over for the twentieth time; trying, in this city of miracles,
to work upon them the miracle of the loaves and fishes. But the miracle
won't come; they remain only two very much bethumbed epistles. Dear
Roger, I have been extremely vexed and uneasy. I have fancied you were
ill, or, worse, -- that out of sight is out of mind. It's not with me, I
assure you. I have written you twelve little letters. They  have
been short only cause I have
been horribly busy. To-day I declined an invitation to drive on the
Campagna, on purpose to write to you. The Campagna, -- do you hear? I can
hardly believe that, five months ago, I was watching the ripe apples
drop in the orchard at C --  -- . We are always on our second floor on the
Pincian, with plenty of sun, which you know is the great necessity here.
Close at hand are the great steps of the Piazza di Spagna, where the
beggars and models sit at the receipt of custom. Some of them are so
handsome, sunning themselves there in their picturesqueness, that I
can't help wishing I knew how to paint or draw. I wish I had been a good
girl three years ago and done as you wished, and taken drawing-lessons
in earnest. Dear Roger, I never neglected your advice but to my cost.
Mrs. Keith is extremely kind and determined I shall have not come abroad
to mope, as she says. She doesn't care much for sight-seeing, having
done it all before; though she keeps pretty well au courant of the
various church festivals. She very often talks of you and is very fond
of you. She is full of good points, but that is her best one. My own
sight-seeing habits don't at all incommode her, owing to my having made
the acquaintance of a little old German lady who lives at the top of our
house. She is a queer wizened oddity of a woman, but she is very clever
and friendly, and she has the things of Rome on her fingers' ends. The
reason of her being here is very sad and beautiful. Twelve years ago her
younger sister, a beautiful girl (she has shown me her miniature), was
deceived and abandoned by her betrothed. She fled away from her home,
and after many weary wanderings found her way to Rome, and gained
admission to the convent with the dreadful name, -- the Sepolte Vive.
Here, ever since, she has been immured. The inmates are literally buried
alive; they are dead to the outer world. My poor little Mademoiselle
Stamm followed her and took up her dwelling here, to be near her, though
with a dead stone wall between them. For twelve years she has never seen
her. Her only communication with Lisa -- her conventual name she doesn't
even know -- is once a week to deposit a bouquet of flowers, with her name
attached, in the little blind wicket of the convent-wall. To do this
with her own hands, she lives in Rome. She composes her bouquet with a
kind of passion; I have seen her and helped her. Fortunately flowers in
Rome are very cheap, for my friend is deplorably poor. I have had a
little pleasure, a great pleasure rather, I confess it has been. For the
past two months I have furnished the flowers, and I assure you we have
had the best. I go each time with Mademoiselle Stamm to the wicket, and
we put in our bouquet and see it gobbled up into the speechless maw of
the cloister. It's a dismal amusement, but I confess it interests me. I
feel as if I knew this poor Lisa; though, after all, she may be dead,
and we may be worshipping a shadow. But in this city of shadows and
memories, what is one shadow the more? Don't think, however, that we
spend all our time in this grim fashion. We go everywhere, we see
everything; I couldn't be in better hands. Mrs. Keith has doubts about
my friend's moral influence; she accuses her of being a German
philosopher in petticoats. She is a German, she wears petticoats; and
having known poverty and unhappiness, she is obliged to be something of
a philosopher. As for her metaphysics, they may be very wicked, but I
should be too stupid to understand them, and it's less trouble to abide
by my own -- and Mrs. Keith's! At all events, I have told her all about
you, and she says you are the one good man she ever heard of: so it's
not for you to disapprove of her! My mornings I spend with her; after
lunch I go out with Mrs. Keith. We drive to the various villas, make
visits upon all kinds of people, go to studios and churches and palaces.
In the evenings we hold high revel. Mrs. Keith knows  every one;
she receives a great many people, and we go out in proportion. It's a
most amusing world. I have seen more people in the last six weeks than I
ever expected to in a lifetime. I feel so old -- you wouldn't know me! One
grows more in a month in this wonderful Rome than in a year at home.
Mrs. Keith is very much liked and admired. She has lightened her
mourning and looks much better; but, as she says, she will never be
herself till she gets back to pink. As for me, I wear pink and blue and
every color of the rainbow. It appears that everything suits me; there's
no spoiling me. You see it's an advantage not to have a complexion. Of
course, I'm out, -- a thousand miles out. I came out six weeks ago at
the great ball of the Princess X. How the Princess X. -- poor lady! -- came
to serve my turn, is more than I can say; but Mrs. Keith is a fairy
godmother; she shod me in glass slippers and we went. I fortunately came
home with my slippers on my feet. I was very much frightened when we
went in. I curtesied to the Princess; and the Princess stared
good-naturedly; while I heard Mrs. Keith behind me whispering, Lower,
lower! But I have yet to learn how to curtesy to condescending
princesses. Now I can drop a little bow to a good old cardinal as
smartly as you please. Mrs. Keith has presented me to half a dozen, with
whom I pass, I suppose, for an interesting convert. Alas, I'm only a
convert to worldly vanities, which I confess I vastly enjoy. Dear Roger,
I am hopelessly frivolous. The shrinking diffidence of childhood I have
utterly cast away. I speak up at people as bold as brass. I like having
them introduced to me, and having to be interested and interesting at a
moment's notice. I like listening and watching; I like sitting up to the
small hours; I like talking myself. But I need hardly to tell you this,
at the end of my ten pages of chatter. I have talked about my own
affairs, because I know they will interest you. Profit by my good
example, and tell me all about yours. Do you miss me? I have read over
and over your two little notes, to find some little hint that you do;
but not a word! I confess I wouldn't have you too unhappy. I am so glad
to hear you are in town, and not at that dreary, wintry C --  -- . Is our
old C --  --  life at an end, I wonder? Nothing can ever be the same after a
winter in Rome. Sometimes I'm half frightened at having had it in my
youth. It leaves such a chance for a contrasted future! But I shall come
back some day with you. And not even the Princess X. shall make me
forget my winter seat by the library fire at C --  -- , my summer seat under
the great apple-tree."

This production seemed to Roger a marvel of intellectual promise and
epistolary grace; it filled his eyes with grateful tears; he carried it
in his pocket-book and read it to a dozen people. His tears, however,
were partly those of penitence, as well as of delight. He had had a
purpose in staying his own hand, though heaven knows it had ached to
write. He wished to make Nora miss him and to let silence combine with
absence to plead for him. Had he succeeded? Not too well, it would seem;
yet well enough to make him feel that he had been cruel. His letter
occupied him so intensely that it was not till within an hour of Mrs.
Middleton's dinner that he remembered his engagement. In the
drawing-room he found Miss Sandys, looking even more beautiful in a dark
high-necked dress than in the glory of gauze and flowers. During dinner
he was in excellent spirits; he uttered perhaps no epigrams, but he
gave, by his laughter, an epigrammatic turn to the ladyish gossip of his
companions. Mrs. Middleton entertained the best hopes. When they had
left the table she betook herself to her arm-chair, and erected a little
hand-screen before her face, behind which she slept or not, as you
please. Roger, suddenly bethinking himself that if Miss Sandys had been
made a party to the old lady's views, his alacrity of manner might
compromise him, checked his vivacity,  and asked his companion
stiffly if she played the piano. On her confessing to this
accomplishment, he of course proceeded to open the instrument, which
stood in the adjoining room. Here Miss Sandys sat down and played with
great resolution an exquisite composition of Schubert. As she struck the
last note he uttered some superlative of praise. She was silent for a
moment, and then, "That's a thing I rarely play," she said.

"It's very difficult, I suppose."

"It's not only difficult, but it's too sad."

"Sad!" cried Roger, "I should call it very joyous."

"You must be in very good spirits! I take it to have been meant for pure
sadness. This is what should suit your mood!" and she attacked with
great animation one of Strauss's waltzes. But she had played but a dozen
chords when he interrupted her. "Spare me," he said. "I may be glad, but
not with that gladness. I confess that I am in spirits. I have just had
a letter from that young friend of whom I spoke to you. "

"Your adopted daughter? Mrs. Middleton told me about her."

"Mrs. Middleton," said Roger, in downright fashion, "knows nothing about
her. Mrs. Middleton," and he lowered his voice and laughed, "is not an
oracle of wisdom." He glanced into the other room at their hostess and
her complaisant screen. He felt with peculiar intensity that, whether
she was napping or no, she was a sadly superficial -- in fact a positively
immoral -- old woman. It seemed absurd to believe that this fair wise
creature before him had lent herself to a scheme of such a one's making.
He looked awhile at her deep clear eyes and the firm sweetness of her
lips. It would be a satisfaction to smile with her over Mrs. Middleton's
machinations. "Do you know what she wants to do with us?" he went on.
"She wants to make a match between us."

He waited for her smile, but it was heralded by a blush, -- a blush
portentous, formidable, tragical. Like a sudden glow of sunset in a
noonday sky, it covered her fair face and burned on her cloudless brow.
"The deuce!" thought Roger. "Can it be, -- can it be?" The smile he had
invoked followed fast; but this was not the order of nature.

"A match between us!" said Miss Sandys. "What a brilliant idea!"

"Not that I can't easily imagine falling in love with you," Roger
rejoined; "but -- but -- "

"But you're in love with some one else." Her eyes, for a moment, rested
on him intently. "With your protegee!"

Roger hesitated. It seemed odd to be making this sacred confidence to a
stranger; but with this matter of Mrs. Middleton's little arrangement
between them, she was hardly a stranger. If he had offended her, too,
the part of gallantry was to avow everything. "Yes, I'm in love!" he
said. "And with the young lady you so much resemble. She doesn't know
it. Only one or two persons know it, save yourself. It's the secret of
my life, Miss Sandys. She is abroad. I have wished to do what I could
for her. It's an odd sort of position, you know. I have brought her up
with the view of making her my wife, but I've never breathed a word of
it to her. She must choose for herself. My hope is that she'll choose
me. But heaven knows what turn she may take, what may happen to her over
there in Rome. I hope for the best; but I think of little else.
Meanwhile I go about with a sober face, and eat and sleep and talk, like
the rest of the world; but all the while I'm counting the hours. Really,
I don't know what has started me up in this way. I don't suppose you'll
at all understand my situation; but you are evidently so good that I
feel as if I might count on your sympathies."

Miss Sandys listened with her eyes bent downward, and with great
gravity. When he had spoken, she gave him her hand with a certain
passionate abruptness. "You have them!" she  said. "Much good may
they do you! I know nothing of your friend, but it's hard to fancy her
disappointing you. I perhaps don't altogether enter into your situation.
It's novel, but it's extremely interesting. I hope before rejecting you
she'll think twice. I don't bestow my esteem at random, but you have it,
Mr. Lawrence, absolutely." And with these words she rose. At the same
moment their hostess suspended her siesta, and the conversation became
general. It can hardly be said, however, to have prospered. Miss Sandys
talked with a certain gracious zeal which was not unallied, I imagine,
to a desire to efface the trace of that superb blush I have attempted to
chronicle. Roger brooded and wondered; and Mrs. Middleton, fancying that
things were not going well, expressed her displeasure by abusing every
one who was mentioned. She took heart again for the moment when, on the
young lady's carriage being announced, the latter, turning in farewell
to Roger, asked him if he ever came to New York. "When you are next
there," she said, "you must make a point of coming to see me. You'll
have something to tell me."

After she had gone Roger demanded of Mrs. Middleton whether she had
imparted to Miss Sandys her scheme for their common felicity. "Never
mind what I said, or didn't say," she replied. "She knows enough not to
be taken unawares. And now tell me -- " But Roger would tell her nothing.
He made his escape, and as he walked home in the frosty star-light, his
face wore a broad smile of the most shameless elation. He had gone up in
the market. Nora might do worse! There stood that beautiful woman
knocking at his door.

A few evenings after this Roger called upon Hubert. Not immediately, but
on what may be called the second line of conversation, Hubert asked him
what news he had from Nora. Roger replied by reading her letter aloud.
For some moments after he had finished Hubert was silent. " One grows
more in a month in this wonderful Rome, " he said at last, quoting,
"than in a year at home."

"Grow, grow, grow, and heaven speed it!" said Roger.

"She's growing, you may depend upon it."

"Of course she is; and yet," said Roger, discriminatingly, "there is a
kind of girlish freshness, a childish simplicity, in her style."

"Strongly marked," said Hubert, laughing. "I have just got a letter from
her you'd take to be written by a child of ten."

"You have a letter?"

"It came an hour ago. Let me read it."

"Had you written to her?"

"Not a word. But you'll see." And Hubert in his dressing-gown, standing
before the fire, with the same silver-sounding accents Nora had admired,
distilled her own gentle prose into Roger's attentive ear.

"I have not forgotten your asking me to write to you about your
beloved Pincian view. Indeed, I have been daily reminded of it by having
that same view continually before my eyes. From my own window I see the
same dark Rome, the same blue Campagna. I have rigorously performed my
promise, however, of ascending to your little terrace. I have an old
German friend here, a perfect archaeologist in petticoats, in whose
company I think as little of climbing to terraces and towers as of
diving into catacombs and crypts. We chose the finest day of the winter,
and made the pilgrimage together. The plaster-merchant is still in the
basement. We saw him in his doorway, standing to dry, whitened over as
if he meant personally to be cast. We reached your terrace in safety. It
was flooded with light, with that tempered Roman glow which seems to be
compounded of molten gold and liquid amethyst. A young painter who
occupies your rooms had set up his easel under an umbrella in the open
air. A young contadina, imported I suppose from the Piazza di Spagna,
was  sitting to him in the brilliant light, which deepened
splendidly her brown face, her blue-black hair, and her white
head-cloth. He was flattering her to his heart's content, and of course
to hers. When I want my portrait painted, I shall know where to go. My
friend explained to him that we had come to look at his terrace in
behalf of an unhappy far-away American gentleman who had once been
master of it. Hereupon he was charmingly polite. He showed us the little
salonetta, the fragment of bas-relief inserted in the wall, -- was it
there in your day? -- and a dozen of his own pictures. One of them was a
very pretty version of the view from the terrace. Does it betray an
indecent greed for applause to let you know that I bought it, and that,
if you are very good and write me a delightful long letter, you shall
have it when I get home? It seemed to me that you would be glad to learn
that your little habitation hadn't fallen away from its high tradition,
and that it still is consecrated to the sunny vigils of genius and
ambition. Your vigils, I suppose, were not enlivened by dark-eyed
contadine, though they were shared by that poor little American
sculptress. I asked the young painter if she had left any memory behind
her. Only a memory, it appears. She died a month after his arrival. I
never was so bountifully thanked for anything as for buying our young
man's picture. As he poured out his lovely Italian gratulations, I felt
like some patronizing duchess of the Renaissance. You will have to do
your best, when I transfer it to your hands, to give as pretty a turn to
your gratitude. This is only one specimen of a hundred delightful
rambles I have had with Mlle. Stamm. We go a great deal to the churches;
I never tire of them. Not in the least that I'm turning Papist; though
in Mrs. Keith's society, if I chose to do so, I might treat myself to
the luxury of being a nine days' wonder, (admire my self-denial!) but
because they are so picturesque and historic; so redolent of memories,
so rich with traditions, so charged with atmosphere, so haunted with the
past. I like to linger in them, -- a barbarous Western maid, doubly a
heretic, an alien social and religious, -- and watch the people come and
go on this eternal business of salvation, -- take their ease between the
fancy walls of the faith. To go into most of the churches is like
reading some better novel than I find most novels. They are pitched, as
it were, in various keys. On a fine day, if I have on my best bonnet, if
I have been to a party the night before, I like to go to Sta. Maria
Maggiore. Standing there, I dream, I dream, cugino mio; I should be
ashamed to tell you the nonsense I do dream! On a rainy day, when I
tramp out with Mlle. Stamm in my water-proof; when the evening before,
instead of going to a party, I have sat quietly at home reading Rio's
"Art Chretien" (recommended by the Abbe Ledoux, Mrs. Keith's confessor),
I like to go to the Ara Coeli. There you stand among the very
bric-a-brac of Christian history. Something takes you at the
throat, -- but you will have felt it; I needn't try to define the
indefinable. Nevertheless, in spite of M. Rio and the Abbe Ledoux (he's
a very charming old man too, and a keeper of ladies' consciences, if
there ever was one), there is small danger of my changing my present
faith for one which will make it a sin to go and hear you preach. Of
course, we don't only haunt the churches. I know in a way the Vatican,
the Capitol, and those entertaining galleries of the great palaces. You,
of course, frequented them and held phantasmal revel there. I'm stopped
short on every side by my deplorable ignorance; still, as far as may be
given to a silly girl, I enjoy. I wish you were here, or that I knew
some benevolent man of culture. My little German duenna is a marvel of
learning and communicativeness, and when she fairly harangues me, I feel
as if in my single person I were a young ladies' boarding-school of
fifty. But only a man can talk really to the point  of this
manliest of cities. Mrs. Keith sees a great many gentlemen of one sort
and another; but what do they know of Brutus and Augustus, of Emperors
and Popes? But I shall keep my impressions, such as they are, and we
shall talk them over at our leisure. I shall bring home plenty of
photographs; we shall have charming times looking at them. Roger writes
that he means next winter to take a furnished house in town. You must
come often and see us. We are to spend the summer in England. . . . . Do
you often see Roger? I suppose so, -- he wrote he was having a capital
winter. By the way, I'm out. I go to balls and wear Paris dresses. I
toil not, neither do I spin. There is apparently no end to my banker's
account, and Mrs. Keith sets me a prodigious example of buying. Is Roger
meanwhile going about in patched trousers?"

At this point Hubert stopped, and on Roger's asking him if there was
nothing more, declared that the rest was private. "As you please," said
Roger. "By Jove! what a letter, -- what a letter!"

Several months later, in September, Roger hired for the ensuing winter a
small furnished house. Mrs. Keith and her companion were expected to
reach home on the 10th of October. On the 6th, Roger took possession of
his house. Most of the rooms had been repainted, and on preparing to
establish himself in one for the night, Roger found that the fresh paint
emitted such an odor as to make his position untenable. Exploring the
premises he discovered in the lower regions, in a kind of sub-basement,
a small vacant apartment, destined to a servant, in which he had a bed
erected. It was damp, but, as he thought, not too damp, the basement
being dry, as basements go. For three nights he occupied this room. On
the fourth morning he woke up with a chill and a headache. By noon he
had a fever. The physician, being sent for, pronounced him seriously
ill, and assured him that he had been guilty of a gross imprudence. He
might as well have slept in a vault. It was the first sanitary
indiscretion Roger had ever committed; he had a dismal foreboding of its
results. Towards evening the fever deepened and he began to lose his
head. He was still distinctly conscious that Nora was to arrive on the
morrow, and sadly disgusted that she was to find him in this sorry
plight. It was a bitter disappointment that he might not meet her at the
steamer. Still, Hubert might. He sent for Hubert accordingly, and had
him brought to his bedside. "I shall be all right in a day or two," he
said, "but meanwhile some one must receive Nora. I know you'll be glad
to, you villain!"

Hubert declared that he was no villain, but that he would be happy to
perform this service. As he looked at his poor fever-stricken cousin,
however, he doubted strongly that Roger would be "all right" in a day or
two. On the morrow he went down to the ship.


ON arriving at the landing-place of the European steamer Hubert found
the passengers filing ashore from the tug-boat in which they had been
transferred from the ship. He instructed himself, as he took his place
near the gangway, to allow for change in Nora's appearance; but even
with this allowance, none of the various advancing ladies seemed to be
Nora. Suddenly he found himself confronted with a fair stranger, a
smile, and an outstretched hand. The smile and the offered hand of
course proclaimed the young lady's identity. Yet in spite of them,
Hubert stood amazed. Verily, his allowance had been small. But the next
moment, "Now you speak," he said, "I recognize you"; and the next he had
greeted Mrs. Keith, who immediately followed her companion; after which
he ushered the two ladies, with their servant and their various feminine
impedimenta, into a carriage. Mrs. Keith was to return directly to her
own house, where, hospitable even amid prospective chaos, she invited
Hubert to join them at dinner. He had, of course, been obliged to inform
Nora off-hand of the cause of Roger's absence, though as yet he made
light of his illness. It was agreed, however, that Nora should remain
with her companion until she had communicated with her guardian.

Entering Mrs. Keith's drawing-room a couple of hours later, Hubert found
the young girl on her knees before the hearth. "I'm rejoicing," she
said, "in the first honest fire I've seen since I left home." He sat
down near by, and in the glow of the firelight he noted her altered
aspect. A year, somehow, had made more than a year's difference. Hubert,
in his intercourse with women, was accustomed to indulge in a sort of
still, cool contemplation which, as a habit, found favor according to
the sensibility of the ladies touching whom it was practised. It had
been intimated to him more than once, in spite of his cloth, that just a
certain turn of the head made this a license. But on this occasion his
gaze was all respectful. He was lost in admiration. Yes, Nora was
beautiful! Her beauty struck him the more that, not having witnessed the
stages quick and fine by which it had come to her, he beheld now as a
sudden revelation the consummate result. She had left home a simple
maiden of common gifts, with no greater burden of loveliness than the
slender, angular, neutral grace of youth and freshness; yet here she
stood, a woman turned, perfect, mature, superb! It was as if she had
bloomed into golden ripeness in the potent sunshine of a great
contentment; as if, fed by the sources of aesthetic delight, her nature
had risen calmly to its uttermost level and filled its measured space
with a deep and lucid flood. A singular harmony and serenity seemed to
pervade her person. Her beauty lay in no inordinate perfection of
individual features, but in the deep sweet fellowship which reigned
between smile and step and glance and tone. The total effect was an
impression of the simplest and yet most stately loveliness. "Pallas
Athene," said Hubert to himself, "sprang full-armed, we are told, from
the brain of Jove. What a pity! What an untruth! She was born in the
West, a plain, fair child; she grew through years and pinafores and all
the changes of slow-coming comeliness. Then one fine day she was
eighteen and she wore a black silk dress of Paris!" Meanwhile Pallas
Athene had been asking about Roger. "Shall I see him to-morrow, at
least?" she demanded.

 "I doubt it; he'll not get out for a number of days."

"But I can easily go to him. Dearest Roger! How things never turn out as
we arrange them! I had arranged this meeting of ours to perfection! He
was to dine with us here, and we were to talk, talk, talk, till
midnight, and then I was to go home with him; and there we were to stand
leaning on the banisters at his room door, and talk, talk, talk till
morning."

"And where was I to be?" asked Hubert.

"I hadn't arranged for you. But I expected to see you to-morrow.
To-morrow I shall go to Roger."

"If the doctor allows," said Hubert.

Nora rose to her feet. "You don't mean to say, Hubert, that it's as bad
as that?" She frowned a little and bent her eyes eagerly on his face.
Hubert heard Mrs. Keith's voice in the hall; in a moment their
tete-a-tete would be at an end. Instead of answering her
question -- "Nora," he said, in his deepest, lowest voice, "you're
beautiful!" He caught her startled, unsatisfied glance; then he turned
and greeted Mrs. Keith. He had not pleased Nora, evidently; it was
premature. So to efface the solemnity of his speech, he repeated it
aloud; "I tell Nora she is beautiful!"

"Bah!" said Mrs. Keith; "you needn't tell her; she knows it."

Nora smiled unconfusedly. "O, say it all the same!"

"Wasn't it the French ambassador, in Rome," Mrs. Keith demanded, "who
attacked you in that fashion? He asked to be introduced. There's an
honor! Mademoiselle, vous etes parfaitement belle. "

"Frenchwomen, as a rule, are not parfaitement belles," said Nora.

Hubert was a lover of the luxuries and splendors of life. He had no
immediate personal need of them; he could make his terms with narrow
circumstances; but his imagination was a born aristocrat. He liked to be
reminded that certain things were, -- ambassadors, ambassadorial
compliments, old-world drawing-rooms, with duskily moulded ceilings.
Nora's beauty, to his vision, took a deeper color from this homage of an
old starred and gartered diplomat. It was sound, it had passed the
ordeal. He had little need at table to play at discreet inattention.
Mrs. Keith, preoccupied with her housekeeping and the "dreadful state"
in which her freshly departed tenants had left her rooms, indulged in a
tragic monologue and dispensed with responses. Nora, looking frankly at
Hubert, consoled their hostess with gentle optimism; and Hubert returned
her looks, wondering. He mused upon the mystery of beauty. What sudden
gift had made her fair? She was the same tender slip of girlhood who had
come trembling to hear him preach a year before; the same, yet how
different! And how sufficient she had grown, withal, to her beauty! How
with the added burden had come an added strength, -- with the greater
charm a greater force, -- a force subtle, sensitive, just faintly
self-suspecting. Then came the thought that all this was
Roger's, -- Roger's investment, Roger's property! He pitied the poor
fellow, lying senseless and helpless, instead of sitting there
delightedly, drawing her out and showing her off. After dinner Nora
talked little, partly, as he felt, from anxiety about her friend, and
partly because of that natural reserve of the altered mind when
confronted with old associations. He would have been glad to believe
that she was taking pensive note of his own appearance. He had made his
mark in her mind a twelvemonth before. Innumerable scenes and figures
had since passed over it; but his figure, Nora now discovered, had not
been trampled out. Fixed there indelibly, it had grown with the growth
of her imagination. She knew that she had vastly changed, and she had
wondered ardently whether Hubert would have lost favor with difference.
Would he suffer by contrast with people she had seen? Would he seem
graceless, colorless, common? Little by little, as  his presence
defined itself, it became plain to her that the Hubert of the past had a
lease of the future. As he rose to take his leave, she begged him to let
her write a line to Roger, which he might carry.

"He'll not be able to read it," said Hubert.

Nora mused. "I'll write it, nevertheless. You'll place it by his
bedside, and the moment he is better he will find it at hand."

When she had left the room, Mrs. Keith demanded tribute. "Haven't I done
well? Haven't I made a charming girl of her?"

"She does you vast credit," said Hubert, with a mental reservation.

"O, but wait awhile! You've not seen her yet. She's tired and anxious
about your cousin. Wait till she comes out. My dear Mr. Lawrence, she's
perfect. She lacks nothing, she has nothing too much. You must do me
justice. I saw it all in the rough, and I knew just what it wanted. I
wish she were my daughter: you should see great doings! And she's as
good as gold! It's her nature. After all, unless your nature's right,
what are you?" But before Hubert could reply to this little spasm of
philosophy, Nora reappeared with her note.

The next morning Mrs. Keith went to call officially upon her
mother-in-law; and Nora, left alone and thinking much of Roger's
condition, conceived an intense desire to see him. He had never been so
dear to her as now, and no one's right to be with him was equal to hers.
She dressed hastily and repaired to the little dwelling they were to
have so cosily occupied. She was admitted by her old friend Lucinda,
who, between trouble and wonder, found a thousand things to say. Nora's
beauty had never received warmer tribute than the affectionate
marvellings of this old woman who had known her early plainness so well.
She led her into the drawing-room, opened the windows and turned her
about in the light, patted her braided tresses, and rejoiced with
motherly unction in her tallness and straightness and elegance. Of Roger
she spoke with tearful eyes. "It would be for him to see you, my dear,"
she said; "he'd not be disappointed. You're better than his brightest
dreams. O, I know all about it! He used to talk to me evenings, after
you were in bed. Lucinda, do you think she's pretty? Lucinda, do you
think she's plain? Lucinda, do you dress her warm? Lucinda, have you
changed her shoes? And mind, Lucinda, take good care of her hair; it's
the only thing we're sure of! Yes, my dear, you've me to thank for
these big braids. Would he feel sure of you now, poor man? You must keep
yourself in cotton-wool till he recovers. You're like a picture; you
ought to be enclosed in a gilt frame and stand against the wall."
Lucinda begged, however, that Nora would not insist upon seeing him; and
her great reluctance betraying his evil case, Nora consented to wait.
Her own slight experience could avail nothing. "He's flighty," said
Lucinda, "and I'm afraid he wouldn't recognize you. If he shouldn't, it
would do you no good; and if he should, it would do him none; it would
increase his fever. He's bad, my dear, he's bad; but leave him to me! I
nursed him as a baby; I nursed him as a boy; I'll nurse him as a man
grown. I've seen him worse than this, with the scarlet fever at college,
when his poor mother was dying at home. Baby, boy, and man, he's always
had the patience of a saint. I'll keep him for you, Miss Nora, now I've
seen you! I shouldn't dare to meet him in heaven, if I were to let him
miss you!"

When Lucinda had returned to her bedside duties, Nora wandered about the
house with a soundless tread, taking melancholy note of the preparations
Roger had made for her return. His choice, his taste, his ingenuity,
were everywhere visible. The best beloved of her possessions from the
old house in the country had been transferred hither and placed in such
kindly half-lights as would temper justice with  mercy; others had
been replaced at a great cost. Nora went into the drawing-room, where
the blinds were closed and the chairs and sofas shrouded in brown linen,
and sat sadly revolving possibilities. How, with Roger's death,
loneliness again would close about her; how he was her world, her
strength, her fate! He had made her life; she needed him still to watch
his work. She seemed to apprehend, as by a sudden supernatural light,
the strong essence of his affection, his wisdom, his alertness, his
masterly zeal. In the perfect stillness of the house she could almost
hear his tread on the stairs, hear his voice utter her name with that
tender adjustment of tone which conveyed a benediction in a commonplace.
Her heart rose to her throat; she felt a passionate desire to scream.
She buried her head in a cushion to stifle the sound; her silent tears
fell upon the silk. Suddenly she heard a step in the hall; she had only
time to brush them away before Hubert Lawrence came in. He greeted her
with surprise. "I came to bring your note," he said; "I didn't expect to
find you."

"Where can I better be?" she asked, with intensity. "I can do nothing
here, but I should look ill elsewhere. Give me back my note, please. It
doesn't say half I feel." He returned it and stood watching her while
she tore it in bits and threw it into the empty fireplace. "I have been
wandering over the house," she added. "Everything tells me of poor
Roger." She felt an indefinable need of protesting of her affection for
him. "I never knew till now," she said, "how much I loved him. I'm sure
you don't know him, Hubert; not as I do. I don't believe any one does.
People always speak of him with a little air of amusement. Even Mrs.
Keith is witty at his expense. But I know him; I grew to know him in
thinking of him while I was away. There's more of him than the world
knows or than the world would ever know, if it was left to his modesty
and the world's stupidity!" Hubert made her a little bow, for her
eloquence. "But I mean to put an end to his modesty. I mean to say,
Come, Roger, hold up your head and speak out your mind and do yourself
common justice. I've seen people without a quarter of his goodness who
had twenty times his assurance and his success. I shall turn the tables!
People shall have no favor from me, unless they recognize Roger. If they
want me, they must take him too. They tell me I'm a beauty, and I can do
what I please. We shall see. The first thing I shall do will be to tip
off their hats to the best man in the world."

"I admire your spirit," said Hubert. "Dr. Johnson liked a good hater; I
like a good lover. On the whole, it's more rarely found. But aren't you
the least bit Quixotic, with your terrible good-faith? No one denies
that Roger is the best of the best of the best! But do what you please,
Nora, you can't make pure virtue entertaining. I, as a minister, you
know, have often regretted this dreadful Siamese twinship that exists
between goodness and dulness. I have my own little Quixotisms. I've
tried to cut them in two; I've dressed them in the most opposite colors;
I've called them by different names; I've boldly denied the connection.
But it's no use; there's a fatal family likeness! Of course you're fond
of Roger. So am I, so is every one in his heart of hearts. But what are
we to do about it? The kindest thing is to leave him alone. His virtues
are of the fireside. You describe him perfectly when you say that
everything in the house here sings his praise -- already, before he's been
here ten days! The chairs are all straight, the pictures are admirably
hung, the locks are oiled, the winter fuel is stocked, the bills are
paid! Look at the tidies pinned on the chairs. I'll warrant you he
pinned them with his own hands. Such is Roger! Such virtues, in a
household, are priceless. He ought never to marry; his wife would die
for want of occupation.  What society cares for in a man is not his
household virtues, but his worldly ones. It wants to see things by the
large end of the telescope, not by the small. Be as good as you
please, says society, but unless you're interesting, I'll none of you!"

"Interesting!" cried Nora, with a rosy flush. "I've seen some very
interesting people who have bored me to death. But if people don't care
for Roger, it's their own loss!" Pausing a moment she fixed Hubert with
the searching candor of her gaze. "You're unjust," she said.

This charge was pleasant to the young man's soul; he would not, for the
world, have summarily rebutted it. "Explain, dear cousin," he said,
smiling kindly. "Wherein am I unjust?"

It was the first time he had called her cousin; the word made a sweet
confusion in her thoughts. But looking at him still while she collected
them, "You don't care to know!" she cried. "Not when you smile so!
You're laughing at me, at Roger, at every one!" Clever men had ere this
been called dreadfully satirical before by pretty women; but never,
surely, with just that imperious naivete. She spoke with a kind of joy
in her frankness; the sense of intimacy with the young man had effaced
the sense of difference.

"The scoffing fiend! That's a pretty character to give a clergyman!"
said Hubert.

"Are you, at heart, a clergyman? I've been wondering."

"You've heard me preach."

"Yes, a year ago, when I was a silly little girl. I want to hear you
again."

"Nay, I've gained my crown, I propose to keep it. I'd rather not be
found out. Besides, I'm not preaching now; I'm resting. Some people
think me a clergyman, Nora," he said, lowering his voice with a hint of
mock humility. "But do you know you're formidable, with your fierce
friendships and your divine suspicions? If you doubt of me, well and
good. Let me walk like a Homeric god in a cloud; without my cloud, I
should be sadly ungodlike. Eh! for that matter, I doubt of myself, on
all but one point, -- my sincere regard for Roger. I love him, I admire
him, I envy him. I'd give the world to be able to exchange my restless
imagination for his silent, sturdy usefulness. I feel as if I were
toiling in the sun, and he were sitting under green trees resting from
an effort which he has never needed to make. Well, virtue I suppose is
welcome to the shade. It's cool, but it's dreadfully obscure! People are
free to find out the best and the worst of me! Here I stand, with all
my imperfections on my head, tricked out with a white cravat, baptized
with a reverend, (heaven save the mark!) equipped with platform and
pulpit and text and audience, -- erected into a mouthpiece of the
spiritual aspirations of mankind. Well, I confess our sins; that's good
humble-minded work. And I must say, in justice, that when once I don my
white cravat (I insist on the cravat, I can do nothing without it) and
mount into the pulpit, a certain gift comes to me. They call it
eloquence; I suppose it is. I don't know what it's worth, but they seem
to like it."

Nora sat speechless, with expanded eyes, hardly knowing whether his
humility or his audacity became him best; flattered, above all, by what
she deemed the recklessness of his confidence. She had removed her hat,
which she held in her hand, gently curling its great black feather. Few
things in a woman could be fairer than her free uncovered brow,
illumined with her gentle wonder. The moment, for Hubert, was critical.
He knew that a young girl's heart stood trembling on the verge of his
influence; he felt, without fatuity, that a glance might beckon her
forward, a word might fix her there. Should he speak his word? This
mystic precinct was haunted with the rustling ghosts of women who had
ventured within and found no rest. But as the innermost meaning of
Nora's beauty grew vivid before him, it seemed  to him that she, at
least, might purge it of its sinister memories and dedicate it to peace.
He knew in his conscience that to such as Nora he was no dispenser of
peace; but as he looked at her she seemed to him as an angel knocking at
his gates. He couldn't turn her away. Let her come, at her risk! For
angels there is a special providence. "Don't think me worse than I am,"
he said, "but don't think me better! I shall love Roger well until I
begin to fancy that you love him too well. Then -- it's absurd perhaps,
but I feel it will be so -- I shall be jealous."

The words were lightly uttered, but his eyes and voice gave them value.
Nora colored and rose; she went to the mirror and put on her hat. Then
turning round with a laugh which, to one in the secret, might have
seemed to sound the coming-of-age of her maiden's fancy, "If you mean to
be jealous," she said, "now's your time! I love Roger now with all my
heart. I can't do more!" She remained but a moment longer.

Her friend's illness baffled the doctors; a sceptic would have said it
obeyed them. For a fortnight it went from bad to worse. Nora remained
constantly at home, and played but a passive part to the little social
drama enacted in Mrs. Keith's drawing-room. This lady had already
cleared her stage and rung up her curtain. To the temporary
indisposition of her jeune premiere she resigned herself with that
serene good grace which she had always at command and which was so
subtle an intermixture of kindness and shrewdness that it would have
taken a wiser head than Nora's to apportion them. She valued the young
girl for her social uses; but she spared her at this trying hour just as
an impressario, with an eye to the whole season, spares a prima
donna who is threatened with bronchitis. Between these two there was
little natural sympathy, but in place of it a wondrous adjustment of
caresses and civilities; little confidence, but innumerable confidences.
They had quietly judged each other and each sat serenely encamped in her
estimate as in a high strategical position. Nevertheless I would have
trusted neither one's account of the other. Nora, for perfect fairness,
had too much to learn and Mrs. Keith too much to unlearn. With her
companion, however, she had unlearned much of that circumspect jealousy
with which, in the interest of her remnant of youth and beauty, she
taxed her commerce with most of the fashionable sisterhood. She strove
to repair her one notable grievance against fate by treating Nora as a
daughter. She mused with real maternal ardor upon the young girl's
matrimonial possibilities, and among them upon that design of which
Roger had dropped her a hint of old. He held to his purpose of course;
if he had fancied Nora then, he could but fancy her now.

But were his purpose and his fancy to be viewed with undiminished
complacency? What might have been great prospects for Nora as a plain,
homeless child, were small prospects for a young lady gifted with beauty
which, with time, would bring the world to her feet. Roger would be the
best of husbands; but in Mrs. Keith's philosophy, a very good husband
might stand for a very indifferent marriage. She herself had married a
fool, but she had married well. Her easy, opulent widowhood was there to
show it. To call things by their names, would Nora, in marrying Roger,
marry money? Mrs. Keith was at loss to appraise the worldly goods of her
rejected suitor. At the time of his suit she had the matter at her
fingers' ends; but she suspected that since then he had been lining his
pockets. He puzzled her; he had a way of seeming neither rich nor poor.
When he spent largely, he had the air of one straining a point; yet when
he abstained, it seemed rather from taste than necessity. She had been
surprised more than once, while abroad, by his copious remittances to
Nora. The point was worth looking up. The reader  will agree with
me that her conclusion warranted her friend either a fool or a hero; for
she graciously assumed that if, financially, Roger should be found
wanting, she could easily prevail upon him to give the pas to a
possible trio of Messrs. So-and-So, millionnaires to a man. Never was
better evidence that Roger passed for a good fellow. In any event,
however, Mrs. Keith had no favor to spare for Hubert and his marked and
increasing "attentions." She had determined to beware of a false alarm;
but meanwhile she was vigilant. Hubert presented himself daily with a
report of his cousin's condition, -- a report most minute and exhaustive,
seemingly, as a couple of hours were needed to make it. Nora, moreover,
went frequently to her friend's house, wandered about aimlessly, and
talked with Lucinda; and here Hubert was sure to be found, or to find
her, engaged in a similar errand. Roger's malady had defined itself as
virulent typhus fever; strength and reason were at the lowest ebb. Of
course on these occasions Hubert walked home with the young girl; and as
the autumn weather made walking delightful, they chose the longest way.
They might have been seen at this period perambulating in deep discourse
certain outlying regions, the connection of which with the main line of
travel between Mrs. Keith's abode and Roger's was not immediately
obvious. Apart from her prudent fears, Mrs. Keith had a scantier
kindness for Hubert than for most comely men. She fancied of him that he
meant nothing, -- nothing at least but the pleasure of the hour; and the
want of a certain masterly intention was of all shortcomings the one she
most deprecated in a clever man. "What is he, when you come to the
point?" she impatiently demanded of a friend to whom she had imparted
her fears. "He's neither fish nor flesh, neither a priest nor a layman.
I like a clergyman to bring with him a little odor of
sanctity, -- something that rests you, after common talk. Nothing is so
pleasant, near the fire, at the sober end of one's drawing-room. If he
doesn't fill a certain place, he's in the way. The Reverend Hubert is
sprawling everywhere at once. His manners are neither of this world nor,
I hope, of the next. Last night he let me bring him a cup of tea and sat
lounging in his chair while I put it in his hand. O, he knows what he's
about. He's pretentious, with all his nonchalance. He finds Bible
texts rather meagre fare for week-days; so he consoles himself with his
pretty parishioners. To be one, you needn't go to his church. Is Nora,
after all I've done for her, going to rush into one of these random
American engagements? I'd rather she married Mr. Jenks the carpenter,
outright."

But in spite of Mrs. Keith's sinister previsions, these young persons
played their game in their own way, with larger moves, even, and heavier
stakes, than their shrewd hostess suspected. As Nora, for the present,
declined all invitations, Mrs. Keith in the evening frequently went out
alone and left her perforce in the drawing-room to entertain Hubert at
her ease. Roger's illness furnished a grave undercurrent to their talk
and gave it a tone of hazardous melancholy. Nora's young life had known
no such hours as these. She hardly knew, perhaps, just what made them
what they were. She hardly wished to know; she shrank from staying the
even lapse of destiny with a question. The scenes of the past year had
gathered into the background like a huge distant landscape, glowing with
color and swarming with life; she seemed to stand with her friend in the
double shadow of a passing cloud and a rustling tree, looking off and
away into the mighty picture, caressing its fine outlines and lingering
where the haze of regret lay purple in its hollows, -- while he whispered
the romance of hill and dale and town and stream. Never, she fondly
fancied, had a young couple conversed with less of narrow exclusion;
they took all history, all culture, into their  confidence; the
radiant light of an immense horizon seemed to shine between them. Nora
had felt deliciously satisfied; she seemed to live equally in every need
of her being, in soul and sense, in heart and mind. As for Hubert, he
knew nothing, for the time, save that the angel was within his gates and
must be treated to angelic fare. He had for the time the conscience, or
the no-conscience, of a man who is feasting on the slopes of Elysium. He
thought no evil, he designed no harm; the hard face of destiny was
twisted into a smile. If only, for Hubert's sake, this had been an
irresponsible world, without penalties to pay, without turnings to the
longest lanes! If the peaches and plums in the garden of pleasure had no
cheeks but ripe ones, and if, when we have eaten the fruit, we hadn't to
dispose of the stones! Nora's charm of charms was a cool maidenly
reserve which Hubert both longed and feared to make an end of. While it
soothed his conscience it irritated his ambition. He wished to know in
what depth of water he stood; but no telltale ripple in this tropic calm
availed to register the tide. Was he drifting in mid-ocean, or was he
cruising idly among the sandy shallows? I regret to say, that as the
days elapsed Hubert found his rest troubled by this folded rose-leaf of
doubt; for he was not used to being baffled by feminine riddles. He
determined to pluck out the heart of the mystery.

One evening, at Mrs. Keith's urgent request, Nora had prepared to go to
the opera, as the season was to last but a week. Mrs. Keith was to dine
with some friends and go thither in their company; one of the ladies was
to call for Nora after dinner, and they were to join the party at the
theatre. In the afternoon came a young German lady, a pianist of merit
who had her way to make, a niece of Nora's regular professor, with whom
Nora had an engagement to practise duets twice a week. It so happened
that, owing to a violent rain, Miss Lilienthal had been unable to depart
after their playing; whereupon Nora had kept her to dinner, and the two,
over their sweetbread, had sworn an eternal friendship. After dinner
Nora went up to dress for the opera, and, on descending, found Hubert
sitting by the fire deep in German discourse with the musical stranger.
"I was afraid you'd be going," said Hubert; "I saw Don Giovanni on the
placards. Well, lots of pleasure! Let me stay here awhile and polish up
my German with mademoiselle. It's great fun. And when the rain's over,
Fraulein, perhaps you'll not mind my walking home with you."

But the Fraulein was gazing in mute envy at Nora, standing before her in
festal array. "She can take the carriage," said Nora, "when we have used
it." And then reading the burden of that wistful regard -- "Have you never
heard Don Giovanni?"

"Often!" said the other, with a poignant smile.

Nora reflected a moment, then drew off her gloves. "You shall go, you
shall take my place. I'll stay at home. Your dress will do; you shall
wear my shawl. Let me put this flower in your hair, and here are my
gloves and my fan. So! You're charming. My gloves are large, -- never
mind. The others will be delighted to have you; come to-morrow and tell
me all about it." Nora's friend, in her carriage, was already at the
door. The gentle Fraulein, half shrinking, half eager, suffered herself
to be hurried down to the carriage. On the doorstep she turned and
kissed her hostess with a fervent "Du allerliebste!" Hubert wondered
whether Nora's purpose had been to please her friend or to please
herself. Was it that she preferred his society to Mozart's music? He
knew that she had a passion for Mozart. "You've lost the opera," he
said, when she reappeared; "but let us have an opera of our own. Play
something; play Mozart." So she played Mozart for more than an hour; and
I doubt whether, among the singers who filled the theatre with their
 melody, the great master found that evening a truer interpreter
than the young girl playing in the lamplit parlor to the man she loved.
She played herself tired. "You ought to be extremely grateful," she
said, as she struck the last chord; "I have never played so well."

Later they came to speak of a novel which lay on the table, and which
Nora had been reading. "It's very silly," she said, "but I go on with it
in spite of myself. I'm afraid I'm too easily pleased; no novel is so
silly I can't read it. I recommend you this, by the way. The hero is a
young clergyman endowed with every grace, who falls in love with a fair
Papist. She is wedded to her faith, and though she loves the young man
after a fashion, she loves her religion better. To win his suit he comes
near going over to Rome; but he pulls up short and determines the
mountain shall come to Mahomet. He sets bravely to work, converts the
young lady, baptizes her with his own hands one week, and marries her
the next."

"Heaven preserve us! what a hotch-potch!" cried Hubert. "Is that what
they are doing nowadays? I very seldom read a novel, but when I glance
into one, I'm sure to find some such stuff as that! Nothing irritates me
so as the flatness of people's imagination. Common life -- I don't say
it's a vision of bliss, but it's better than that! Their stories are
like the underside of a carpet, -- nothing but the stringy grain of the
tissue -- a muddle of figures without shape and flowers without color.
When I read a novel my imagination starts off at a gallop and leaves the
narrator hidden in a cloud of dust; I have to come jogging twenty miles
back to the denouement. Your clergyman here with his Romish sweetheart
must be a very pretty fellow. Why didn't he marry her first and convert
her afterwards? Isn't a clergyman after all, before all, a man? I mean
to write a novel about a priest who falls in love with a pretty
Mahometan and swears by Allah to win her."

"Ah Hubert!" cried Nora, "would you like a clergyman to love a pretty
Mahometan better than the truth?"

"The truth? A pretty Mahometan may be the truth. If you can get it in
the concrete, after shivering all your days in the cold abstract, it's
worth a bit of a compromise. Nora, Nora!" he went on, stretching himself
back on the sofa and flinging one arm over his head, "I stand up for
passion! If a thing can take the shape of passion, that's a fact in its
favor. The greater passion is the better cause. If my love wrestles with
my faith, as the angel with Jacob, and if my love stands uppermost, I'll
admit it's a fair game. Faith is faith, under a hundred forms! Upon my
word, I should like to prove it, in my own person. What a fraction of my
personality is this clerical title! How little it expresses; how little
it covers! On Sundays, in the pulpit, I stand up and talk to five
hundred people. Does each of them, think you, appropriate his five
hundredth share of my discourse? I can imagine talking to one person and
saying five hundred times as much, even though she were a pretty
Mahometan or a prepossessing idolatress! I can imagine being five
thousand miles away from this blessed Boston, -- in Turkish trousers, if
you please, with a turban on my head and a chibouque in my mouth, with a
great blue ball of Eastern sky staring in through the round window, high
up; all in divine insouciance of the fact that Boston was abusing, or,
worse still, forgetting me! That Eastern sky is part of the mise en
scene of the New Testament, -- it has seen greater miracles! But, my dear
Nora," he added, suddenly, "don't let me muddle your convictions." And
he left his sofa and came and leaned against the mantel-shelf. "This is
between ourselves; I talk to you as I would to no one else. Understand
me and forgive me! There are times when I must speak out and make my bow
to the possible, the ideal! I must protest against the vulgar assumption
of people who don't see beyond their noses;  that people who do,
you and I, for instance, are living up to the top of our capacity, that
we are contented, satisfied, balanced. I promise you I'm not satisfied,
not I! I've room for more. I only half live; I'm like a purse filled at
one end with small coin and empty at the other. Perhaps the other will
never know the golden rattle! The Lord's will be done! I can say that
with the best of them. But I shall never pretend that I've known
happiness, that I've known life. On the contrary, I shall maintain I'm a
failure! I had the wit to see, but I lacked the courage to do -- and yet
I've been called reckless, irreverent, audacious. My dear Nora, I'm the
veriest coward on earth; pity me if you don't despise me. There are men
born to imagine things, others born to do them. Evidently, I'm one of
the first. But I do imagine them, I assure you!"

Nora listened to this flow of sweet unreason without staying her hand in
the work, which, as she perceived the drift of his talk, she had rapidly
caught up, but with a beating heart and a sense of rising tears. It was
a ravishing medley of mystery and pathos and frankness. It was the agony
of a restless soul, leaping in passionate rupture from the sickening
circle of routine. Of old, she had thought of Hubert's mind as immutably
placid and fixed; it gave her the notion of lucid depth and soundless
volume. But of late, with greater nearness, she had seen the ripples on
its surface and heard it beating its banks. This was not the first time;
but the waves had never yet broken so high; she had never felt their
salt spray on her cheeks. He had rent for her sake the seamless veil of
the temple and shown her its gorgeous gloom. Before her, she discerned
the image of the genius loci, the tutelar deity, with a dying lamp
smoking at its feet and a fissure in its golden side. The rich
atmosphere confused and enchanted her. The pavement under her feet
seemed to vibrate with the mournful music of a retreating choir. She
went on with her work, mechanically taking her stitches. She felt
Hubert's intense blue eyes; the little blue flower in her tapestry grew
under her quick needle. A great door had been opened between their
hearts; she passed through it. "What is it you imagine," she asked, with
intense curiosity; "what is it you dream of doing?"

"I dream," he said, "of breaking a law for your sake!"

The answer frightened her; it savored of the disorder of passion. What
had she to do with broken laws? She trembled and rolled up her work. "I
dream," she said, trying to smile, "of the romance of keeping laws. I
expect to get a deal of pleasure out of it yet." And she left her chair.
For an instant Hubert was confused. Was this the last struggle which
precedes submission or the mere prudence of indifference? Nora's eyes
were on the clock. It rang out eleven. "To begin with," she said, "let
me keep the law of early to bed. Good night!"

Hubert wondered; he hardly knew whether he was rebuked or challenged.
"You'll at least shake hands," he said, reproachfully.

A deeper consciousness had somehow been opened in her common
consciousness, and she had meant in self-defence to omit this ceremony.
"Good night," she repeated, letting him take her hand. Hubert gazed at
her a moment and raised it to his lips. She blushed and rapidly withdrew
it. "There!" cried Hubert. "I've broken a law!"

"Much good may it do you!" she answered, and went her way. He stood for
a moment, waiting, and fancying, rather fatuously, that she might come
back. Then, as he took up his hat, he wondered whether she too was not a
bit of a coquette.

Nora wondered on her own side whether this scene had not been the least
bit a piece de circonstance. For a day love and doubt fared in
company. Lucinda's mournful discourse on the morrow was not of a nature
to restore her calmness. "Last night," said Roger's nurse, "he was very
bad.  He woke out of his lethargy, but oh, on the other side of
sense! He talked all night about you. If he murmurs a word, it's always
your name. He asked a dozen times if you had arrived, and forgot as
often as I told him -- he, dear man, who used to remember to a collar what
he'd put into the wash! He kept wondering whether anything had happened
to you. Late in the evening, when the carriages began to pass, he cried
out over each that it was you, and what would you think of him for not
coming to meet you? Don't tell her how bad I am, he says; I must have
been in bed two or three days, haven't I, Lucinda? Say I'll be out
to-morrow; that I've only a little cold; that she's not to mind it,
Hubert will do everything for her. And then when, at midnight, the wind
began to blow, he declared it was a storm, that your ship was on the
coast. God keep you safe! Then he asked if you were changed and grown;
were you pretty, were you tall, would he know you? And he took the
hand-glass and looked at himself and wondered if you would know him. He
cried out that he was ugly, he was horrible, you'd hate him. He bade me
bring him his razors and let him shave; and when I wouldn't, he began to
rage and call me names, and then he broke down and cried like a child."
Hearing these things, Nora prayed almost angrily for Roger's
recovery, -- that he might live to see her more cunningly and lovingly his
debtor. She wished to do something, she hardly knew what, not only to
prove, but forever to commemorate, her devotion. Her fancy moulded with
dim prevision the monumental image of some pious sacrifice. You would
have marvelled to see, meanwhile, the easy breathing of her conscience.
To serve Roger, to please Roger, she would give up her dream of Hubert.
But best of all, if the clement skies should suffer that Hubert and she,
one in all things else, should be one in his affection, one in his service!

For a couple of days she saw nothing of Hubert. On the third there came
excellent news of Roger, who had taken a marked turn for the better, and
was out of the woods. She had declined, for the evening, a certain most
seductive invitation; but on the receipt of these tidings she revoked
her refusal. Coming down to the drawing-room with Mrs. Keith, dressed
and shawled, she found Hubert in waiting, with a face which uttered bad
news. Roger's improvement had been momentary, a relapse had followed,
and he was worse than ever. She tossed off her shawl with an energy not
unnoted by her duenna. "Of course I can't go," she said. "It's neither
possible nor proper." Mrs. Keith would have given the camellia out of
her chignon that this thing should not have happened in just this way;
but she submitted with a good grace -- for a duenna. Hubert went down with
her to her carriage. At the foot of the stairs she stopped, and while
gathering up her skirts, "Mr. Lawrence," she demanded, "are you going to
remain here?"

"A little while," said Hubert, with his imperturbable smile.

"A very little while, I hope." She had been wondering whether admonition
would serve as a check or a stimulus. "I need hardly to tell you that
the young lady up stairs is not a person to be trifled with."

"I hardly know what you mean," said Hubert. "Am I a person to trifle?"

"Is it serious, then?"

Hubert hesitated a moment. She perceived a sudden watchful quiver in his
eye, like a sword turned edge outward. She unsheathed one of her own
steely beams, and for the tenth of a second there was a dainty crossing
of blades. "I admire Miss Lambert," cried Hubert, "with all my heart."

"True admiration," said Mrs. Keith, "is one half respect and the other
half self-denial."

Hubert laughed, ever so politely. "I'll put that in a sermon," he said.

"O, I have a sermon to preach you," she answered. "Take your hat and go."

 He made her a little bow, "I'll go up and get my hat." Mrs. Keith,
catching his eye as he closed the carriage door, wished to heaven that
she had held her tongue. "I've done him injustice." she murmured as she
went. "I've fancied him light, but I see he's vicious." Hubert, however,
kept his promise in so far as that he did take up his hat. Having held
it a moment, he put it down. He had reckoned without his hostess! Nora
was seated by the fire, with her bare arms folded, with a downcast brow.
Dressed in pale corn-color, her white throat confined by a band of blue
velvet, sewn with a dozen pearls, she was not a subject for summary
farewells. Meeting her eyes, he saw they were filled with tears. "You
mustn't take this thing too hard," he said.

For a moment she said nothing; then she bent her face into her hands and
her tears flowed. "O poor, poor Roger!" she cried.

Hubert watched her weeping in her ball-dress those primitive tears.
"I've not given him up," he said at last. "But suppose I had -- " She
raised her head and looked at him. "O," he cried, "I should have a
hundred things to say. Both as a minister and as a man, I should preach
resignation. In this crisis, let me speak my mind. Roger is part of your
childhood; your childhood's at an end. Possibly, with it, he too is to
go! At all events you're not to feel that in losing him you lose
everything. I protest! As you sit here, he belongs to your past. Ask
yourself what part he may play in your future. Believe me, you'll have
to settle it, you'll have to choose. Here, in any case, your life
begins. Your tears are for the dead past; this is the future, with its
living needs. Roger's fate is only one of them."

She rose, with her tears replaced by a passionate gravity. "Ah, you
don't know what you say!" she cried. "Talk of my future if you like, but
not of my past! No one can speak of it, no one knows it! Such as you see
me here, bedecked and bedizened, I'm a penniless, homeless, friendless
creature! But for Roger, I might be in the streets! Do you think I've
forgotten it, that I ever can? There are things that color one's life,
memories that last forever. I've my share! What am I to settle, between
whom am I to choose? My love for Roger's no choice, it's part and parcel
of my being!"

She seemed to shine, as she spoke, with a virginal faithfulness which
commanded his own sincerity. Hubert was inspired. He forgot everything
but that she was lovely. "I wish to heaven," he cried, "that you had
never ceased to be penniless and friendless! I wish Roger had left you
alone and not smothered you beneath this monstrous burden of gratitude!
Give him back his gifts! Take all I have! In the streets? In the
streets I should have found you, as lovely in your poverty as you're now
in your finery, and a thousand times more free!" He seized her hand and
met her eyes with the frankness of passion. Pain and pleasure, at once,
possessed Nora's heart. It was as if joy, bursting in, had trampled
certain tender flowers which bloomed on the threshold. But Hubert had
cried, "I love you! I love you!" and joy had taken up the words. She was
unable to speak audibly; but in an instant she was spared the effort.
The servant hastily came in with a note superscribed with her name. She
motioned to Hubert to open it. He read it aloud. "Mr. Lawrence is
sinking. You had better come. I send my carriage." Nora's voice came to
her with a cry, -- "He's dying, he's dying!"

In a minute's time she found herself wrapped in her shawl and seated
with Hubert in the doctor's coupe. A few moments more and the doctor
received them at the door of Roger's room. They passed in and Nora went
straight to the bed. Hubert stood an instant and saw her drop on her
knees at the pillow. She flung back her shawl with vehemence, as if to
release her hands; he was unable to see where she placed  them. He
went on into the adjoining chamber, of which the door stood open. The
room was dark, the other lit by a night-lamp. He stood listening awhile,
but heard nothing; then he began to walk slowly to and fro, past the
doorway. He could see nothing but the shining train of Nora's dress
lying on the carpet beyond the angle of the bed. He wanted terribly to
see more, but he feared to see too much. At moments he fancied he heard
whispers. This lasted some time; then the doctor came in, with what
seemed to him an odd, unprofessional smile. "The young lady knows a few
remedies not taught in the schools," he whispered. "He has recognized
her. He's good for to-night, at least. Half an hour ago he had no pulse
at all, but this has started it. I'll come back in an hour." After he
had gone Lucinda came, self-commissioned, and shut the door in Hubert's
face. He stood a moment, with an unreasoned sense of insult and defeat.
Then he walked straight out of the house. But the next morning, after
breakfast, a more generous sentiment moved him to return. The doctor was
just coming away. "It was a Daniel come to judgment!" the doctor
declared. "I verily believe she saved him. He'll be sitting up in a
fortnight!" Hubert learned that, having achieved her miracle, Nora had
returned to Mrs. Keith's. What arts she had used he was left to imagine.
He had still a sore feeling of having just missed a crowning joy; but
there might yet be time to grasp it. He felt, too, an urgent need of
catching a glimpse of the after-glow of Nora's mystical effluence. He
repaired to Mrs. Keith's, hoping to find the young girl alone. But the
elder lady, as luck would have it, was established in the drawing-room,
and she made haste to inform him that Nora, fatigued by her "watching,"
had not yet left her room. But if Hubert was sombre, Mrs. Keith was
radiant. Now was her chance to preach her promised sermon; she had just
come into possession of facts which furnished a capital text.

"I suppose you'll call me a meddling busybody," she said. "I confess I
seem to myself a model of forbearance. Be so good as to tell me in three
words whether you are in love with Nora."

Taken thus abruptly to task, Hubert, after a moment's trepidation, kept
his balance. He measured the situation at a glance, and pronounced it
bad. But if heroic urbanity would save it, he would be urbane. "It's
hardly a question to answer in two words," he answered, with an
ingenuous smile. "I wish you could tell me!"

"Really," said Mrs. Keith, "it seems to me that by this time you might
know. Tell me at least whether you are prepared to marry her?"

Hubert hesitated just an instant. "Of course not -- so long as I'm not
sure I'm in love with her!"

"And pray when will you make up your mind? And what's to become of poor
Nora meanwhile?"

"Why, Mrs. Keith, if Nora can wait, surely you can." The urbanity need
not be all on his side.

"Nora can wait? That's easily said. Is a young girl a thing to be tried
like a horse, to be taken up and dropped again? O Mr. Lawrence, if I had
ever doubted of the selfishness of men! What this matter has been for
you, you know best yourself; but I can tell you that for Nora it has
been serious!" At these words Hubert passed his hand nervously through
his hair and walked to the window. "The fop!" said Mrs. Keith, sotto
voce. "His vanity is tickled, on the very verge of exposure. If you are
not consciously, passionately in love, you have no business here," she
proceeded. "Retire, quietly, expeditiously, humbly. Leave Nora to me.
I'll heal her bruises. They shall have been wholesome ones."

Hubert felt that these peremptory accents implied a menace; and that the
lady spoke by book. His vanity rankled, but discretion drew a long
breath. For a fortnight it had been shut up in a closet. He thanked the
 Lord they had no witnesses; with Mrs. Keith, for once, he could
afford to sing small. He remained silent for a moment, with his brow
bent in meditation. Then turning suddenly, he took the bull by the
horns. "Mrs. Keith," he said, "you've done me a service. I thank you
sincerely. I have gone further than I meant; I admit it. I'm selfish,
I'm vain, I'm anything you please. My only excuse is Nora's loveliness.
It had beguiled me; I had forgotten that this is a life of hard logic."
And he bravely took up his hat.

Mrs. Keith was primed for a "scene"; she was annoyed at missing it, and
her easy triumph led her on. She thought, too, of the young girl up
stairs, combing out her golden hair, and dreaming less of the logic than
the poetry of life. She had dragged a heavy gun to the front; she
determined to fire her shot. So much virtue had never inspired her with
so little respect. She played a moment with the bow on her
morning-dress. "Let me thank you for your great humility," she said. "Do
you know I was going to be afraid of you, so that I had intrenched
myself behind a great big preposterous fact? I met last evening Mrs.
Chatterton of New York. You know she's a great talker, but she talks to
the point. She mentioned your engagement to a certain young lady, a
dark-eyed person -- need I repeat the name?" Nay, it was as well she
shouldn't! Hubert stood before her, flushing crimson, with his blue eyes
flashing cold wrath. He remained silent a moment, shaking a scornful
finger at her. "For shame, madam," he cried. "That's shocking taste! You
might have been generous; it seems to me I deserve it." And with a
summary bow he departed.

Mrs. Keith repented of this extra touch of zeal; the more so as she
found that, practically, Nora was to be the victim of the young man's
displeasure. For four days he gave no sign; Nora was left to explain his
absence as she might. Even Roger's amendment failed to console her. At
last, as the two ladies were sitting at lunch, his card was brought in,
superscribed P. P. C. Nora read it in silence, and for a moment rested
her eyes on her companion with a piteous look which seemed to cry, "It's
you I've to thank for this!" A torrent of remonstrances rose to Nora's
lips, but they were sealed by the reflection that, though her friend
might have provoked Hubert's desertion, its desperate abruptness pointed
to some deeper cause. She pretended to occupy herself with her plate;
but her self-control was rapidly ebbing. She silently rose and retreated
to her own room, leaving Mrs. Keith moralizing over her mutton-chop,
upon the miseries of young ladyhood and the immeasurable egotism of the
man who had rather produce a cruel effect than none at all. The various
emotions to which Nora had been recently exposed proved too much for her
strength; for a week after this she was seriously ill. On the day she
left her room she received a short note from Hubert.

"NEW YORK.

"DEAR FRIEND: You have, I suppose, been expecting to hear from me; but I
have not written, because I am unable to write as I wish and unwilling
to write as -- other people would wish! I left Boston suddenly, but not
unadvisedly. I shall for the present be occupied here. The last month I
spent there will remain one of the best memories of my life. But it was
time it should end! Remember me a little -- what do I say? -- forget me!
Farewell. I received this morning from the doctor the best accounts of
Roger."

Nora handled this letter somewhat as one may imagine a pious maiden of
the antique world to have treated a messenger from the Delphic oracle.
It was obscure, it was even sinister; but deep in its sacred dimness
there seemed to glow a fiery particle of truth. She locked it up in her
dressing-case and wondered and waited. Shortly after came a missive of a
different  cast. It was from her cousin, George Fenton, and also
dated New York.

"DEAR NORA: You have left me to find out your return in the papers. I
saw your name a month ago in the steamer's list. But I hope the fine
people and things you have been seeing haven't driven me quite out of
your heart, and that you have a corner left for your poor old cousin and
his scrawls. I received your answer to my letter of last February; after
which I immediately wrote again, but in vain! Perhaps you never got my
letter; I could scarcely decipher your Italian address. Excuse my want
of learning! Your photograph is a joy forever. Are you really as good
looking as that? It taxes even the credulity of one who knows how pretty
you used to be; how good you must be still. When I last wrote I told you
of my having taken stock in an enterprise for working over refuse
iron, -- dreadful trade! What do you care for refuse iron? It's awfully
dirty and not fit to be talked of to a fine lady like you. Still, if you
have any odd bits, -- old keys, old nails, -- the smallest contributions
thankfully received! We think there's money in it; if there isn't, I'm
afloat again; but again I suppose I shall drift ashore. If this fails, I
think of going to Texas. I wish hugely I might see you before the bloom
of my youth is sicklied o'er by an atmosphere of iron-rust. Get Mr.
Lawrence to bring you to New York for a week. I suppose it wouldn't do
for me to call on you in the light of day; but I might take service as a
waiter at your hotel, and express my sentiments in strong tea and soft
mutton-chops. Does he still loathe me, Mr. Lawrence? Poor man, tell him
to take it easy; I shan't trouble him again. Are you ever lonely in the
midst of your grandeur? Do you ever feel that, after all, these people
are not of your blood and bone? I should like you to quarrel with them,
to know a day's friendlessness or a day's freedom, so that you might
remember that here in New York, in a dusty iron-yard, there is a poor
devil who is yours without question, without condition, and till death!"


Roger's convalescence went bravely on. One morning as he lay coquetting
deliciously with returning sense, he became aware that a woman was
sitting at his window in the sun. She seemed to be reading. He fancied
vaguely that she was Lucinda; but at last it occurred to him that
Lucinda was not addicted to literature, and that Lucinda's tresses,
catching the light, were not of a kind to take on the likeness of a
queenly crown. She was no vision; his visions had been dark and
troubled; and this image was radiant and fixed. He half closed his eyes
and watched her lazily through the lids. There came to him, out of his
boyish past, a vague, delightful echo of the "Arabian Nights." The room
was gilded by the autumn sunshine into the semblance of an enamelled
harem court; he himself seemed a languid Persian, lounging on musky
cushions; the fair woman at the window a Scheherazade, a Badoura. He
closed his eyes completely and gave a little groan, to see if she would
move. When he opened them, she had moved; she stood near his bed,
looking at him. For a moment his puzzled gaze still told him nothing but
that she was fictitiously fair. She smiled and smiled, and, after a
little, as he only stared confusedly, she blushed, not like Badoura or
Scheherazade, but like Nora. Her frequent presence after this became the
great fact in his convalescence. The thought of her beauty filled the
long empty hours during which he was forbidden to do anything but grow
strong. Sometimes he wondered whether his impression of it was only part
of the universal optimism of a man with a raging appetite. Then he would
question Lucinda, who would shake her head and chuckle with elderly
archness. "Wait till you're on your feet, sir, and judge  for
yourself," she would say. "Go and call on her at Mrs. Keith's, and then
tell me what you think." He grew well with a beating heart; he would
have stayed his recovery for the very dread of facing his happiness. He
muffled his pulse in a kind of brooding gravity which puzzled the young
girl, who began to wonder whether his illness had left a flaw in his
temper. Toward the last, Roger began to blush for his lingering aroma of
medicine, and to wish to make a better appearance. He made a point, for
some days, of refusing to see her, -- always with a loving message, of
course, conveyed through Lucinda. Meanwhile, he was shaved, anointed,
and costumed. Finally, on a Sunday, he discarded his dressing-gown and
sat up clothed and in his right mind. The effort, of course, gave him a
huge appetite, and he dealt vigorous justice upon his luncheon. He had
just finished, and his little table was still in position near his
arm-chair, when Nora made her appearance. She had been to church, and on
leaving church had taken a long walk. She wore one of those dark rich
toilets of early winter, so becoming to fair beauties; but her face
lacked freshness; she was pale and tired. On Roger's remarking it, she
said the service had given her a headache; as a remedy, she had marched
off briskly at haphazard, missed her way and wandered hither and
thither. But here she was, safe and sound and hungry. She petitioned for
a share in certain eleemosynary dainties, -- that heavy crop of forbidden
fruit, which blooms in convalescence, -- which she had perceived wasting
their sweetness in the dining-room. Hereupon she took off her bonnet and
was bountifully served at Roger's table. She ate largely and hungrily,
jesting at her appetite and getting back her color. Roger leaned back in
his chair, watching her, carving her partridge, offering her this and
that; in a word, falling in love. It happened as naturally, as he had
never allowed for it. The flower of her beauty had bloomed in a night,
that of his passion in a day. When at last she laid down her fork, and,
sinking back in her chair, folded her hands on her arms and sat facing
him with a friendly, pointless, satisfied smile, and then raising her
goblet, threw back her head and showed her white throat and glanced at
him over the brim, while he noted her plump ringless hand, with the
little finger curled out, he felt that he was in health again. She
strolled about the room, idly touching the instruments on his
dressing-table and the odds and ends on his chimney-piece. Her dress,
which she had released from the loops and festoons then in fashion,
trailed rustling on the carpet, and lent her a sumptuous, ladyish air
which seemed to give a price to this domiciliary visit. "Everywhere,
everywhere, a little dust," she said. "I see it's more than time I
should be back here. I have been waiting for you to invite me; but as
you don't seem inclined, I invite myself."

Roger said nothing for a moment. Then with a blush: "I don't mean to
invite you; I don't want you."

Nora stared. "Don't want me? Par exemple!"

"I want you as a visitor, but not as a -- " And he fumbled for his word.

"As a regular boarder?" she took it gayly. "You turn me out of doors?"

"No; I don't take you in -- yet awhile. My dear child, I have a reason."

Nora wondered, still smiling. "I might consider this very unkind," she
said, "if I hadn't the patience of an angel. Could you favor me with a
hint of your reason?"

"Not now," he answered. "Never fear," he cried, with a laugh. "When it
comes, it will be all-sufficient!" But he imparted it, a couple of days
after, to Mrs. Keith, who came late in the afternoon to present her
compliments on his recovery. She displayed an almost sisterly
graciousness, enhanced by a lingering spice of coquetry; but somehow, as
she talked, he felt as if she were an old woman and he still a young
man. It seemed a sort of hearsay  that they should ever have been
mistress and lover. "Nora will have told you," he said, "of my wishing
you to kindly keep her awhile. I can give you no better proof of my
regard, for the fact is, my dear friend, I'm in love with her."

"Come!" she cried. "This is interesting."

"I wish her to accept me freely, as she would accept any other man. For
that purpose I must cease to be, in all personal matters, her guardian."

"She must herself forget her wardship, if there is to be any
sentimentalizing between you, -- all but forget it, at least. Let me speak
frankly," she went on. Whereupon Roger frowned a bit, for he had known
her frankness to be somewhat incisive. "It's all very well that you
should be in love with her. You're not the first. Don't be frightened;
your chance is fair. The needful point is that she should be just the
least bit in love with you."

He shook his head with melancholy modesty. "I don't expect that. She
loves me a little, I hope; but I say nothing to her imagination.
Circumstances are fatally against it. If she falls in love, it will be
with a man as unlike me as possible. Nevertheless, I do hope she may,
without pain, learn to think of me as a husband. I hope," he cried, with
appealing eyes, "that she may see a certain rough propriety in it. After
all, who can make her such a husband as I? I'm neither handsome, nor
clever, nor accomplished, nor known. She might choose from a dozen men
who are. Pretty lovers doubtless they'd make; but, my friend, it's the
husband, the husband, that counts!" And he beat his clenched hand on
his knee. "Do they know her, have they watched her, as I have done? What
are their months to my years, their vows to my acts? Mrs. Keith!" -- and
he grasped her hand as if to call her to witness, -- "I undertake to make
her happy. I know what you can say, -- that a woman's happiness is worth
nothing unless imagination lends a hand. Well, even as a lover, perhaps
I'm not a hopeless case! And then, I confess, other things being equal,
I'd rather Nora shouldn't marry a poor man."

Mrs. Keith spoke, on this hint. "You're a rich one then?"

Roger folded up his pocket-handkerchief and patted it out on his knee,
with pregnant hesitation. "Yes, I'm rich, -- I may call it so. I'm rich!"
he repeated with unction. "I can say it at last." He paused a moment,
and then, with admirable bonhomie: "I was not altogether a pauper when
you refused me. Since then, for the last six years, I have been saving
and sparing and counting. My purpose has sharpened my wits, and fortune,
too, has favored me. I've speculated a little, I've handled stock and
turned this and that about, and now I can offer my wife a very pretty
fortune. It's been going on very quietly; people don't know it; but
Nora, if she cares to, shall show 'em!" Mrs. Keith colored and mused;
she was lost in a tardy afterthought. "It seems odd to be talking to you
this way," Roger went on, exhilarated by this resume of his career.
"Do you remember that letter of mine from P --  -- ?"

"I didn't tear it up in a rage," she answered. "I came across it the
other day."

"It was rather odd, my writing it, you know," Roger confessed. "But in
my sudden desire to register a vow, I needed a friend. I turned to you
as my best friend." Mrs. Keith acknowledged the honor with a little bow.
Had she made a mistake of old? She very soon decided that Nora should
not repeat it. Her hand-shake, as she left her friend, was generous; it
seemed to assure him that he might count upon her.

When, soon after, he made his appearance in her drawing-room, she gave
him many a hint as to how to play his cards. But he irritated her by his
slowness; he was too circumspect by half. It was only in the evening
that he took a hand in the game. During the day, he left Nora to her
 own affairs, and was in general neither more nor less attentive
than if he had been some susceptible stranger. To spectators his present
relation with the young girl was somewhat puzzling; though Mrs. Keith,
"by no ambiguous giving out," had diffused a sympathetic expectancy.
Roger wondered again and again whether Nora had guessed his meaning. He
observed in her at times, in talk, he fancied, a forced nervous levity
which seemed born of a need to conjure away the phantom of sentiment.
And of this hostile need, of course, he hereupon strove to trace the
lineage. He talked with her little, as yet, and never interfered in her
talk with others; but he watched her devotedly from corners, and caught
her words through the hum of voices, at a distance, while she exchanged
soft nothings with the rank and file of her admirers. He was lost in
incredulity of his good fortune; he rubbed his eyes. O heavenly favor of
fate! Sometimes, as she stood before him, he caught her looking at him
with heavy eyes and uncertain lips, as if she were on the verge of some
passionate confidence. Adding this to that, Roger found himself rudely
confronted with the suspicion that she was in love. Search as he could,
however, he was unable to find his man. It was no one there present;
they were all alike wasting their shot; the enemy had stolen a march and
was hidden in the very heart of the citadel. He appealed distractedly to
Mrs. Keith. "Lovesick, -- lovesick is the word," he groaned. "I've read of
it all my days in the poets, but here it is in the flesh. Poor girl,
poor girl! She plays her part well; she's wound up tight; but the spring
will snap and the watch run down. D -- n the man! I'd rather he had her
than sit and see this." He saw that his friend had bad news. "Tell me
everything," he said; "don't spare me."

"You've noticed it at last," she answered. "I was afraid you would.
Well! he's not far to seek. Think it over; can't you guess? My dear Mr.
Lawrence, you're celestially simple. Your cousin Hubert is not."

"Hubert!" Roger echoed, staring. A spasm passed over his face; his eyes
flashed. At last he hung his head. "Good heavens! Have I done it all for
Hubert?"

"Not if I can help it!" cried Mrs. Keith, with force. "She mayn't marry
you; but at the worst, she shan't marry him!"

Roger laid his hand on her arm; first heavily, then gently. "Dear
friend, she must be happy, at any cost. If she loves Hubert, she must
marry him. I'll settle an income!"

Mrs. Keith gave his knuckles a great rap with her fan. "You'll settle a
fiddlestick! You'll keep your money and you'll have Miss Nora. Leave it
to me! If you have no regard for your rights, at least I have."

"Rights? what rights have I? I might have let her alone. I needn't have
settled down on her in her helpless childhood. O, Hubert's a happy man!
Does he know it? You must write to him. I can't!"

Mrs. Keith burst into a ringing laugh. "Know it? You're amazing! Hadn't
I better telegraph?"

Roger stared and frowned. "Does he suspect it then?"

Mrs. Keith rolled up her eyes. "Come," she said, "we must begin at the
beginning. When you speak of your cousin, you open up a gulf. There's
not much in it, it's true; but it's a gulf. Your cousin is a
knave, -- neither more nor less. Allow me; I know what I say. He knew, of
course, of your plans for Nora?" Roger nodded. "Of course he did! He
took his chance, therefore, while you were well out of the way. He lost
no time, and if Nora is in love with him, he can tell you why. He knew
that he couldn't marry her, that he shouldn't, that he wouldn't. But he
made love to her, to pass the time. Happily, it passed soon. I had of
course to be cautious; but as soon as I saw how things were going, I
spoke, and spoke to the point. Though he's a knave,  he's no fool;
that was all he needed. He made his excuses, such as they were! I shall
know in future what to think of him."

Roger shook his head mournfully. "I'm afraid it's not to be so easily
settled. As you say, Hubert's a gulf. I never sounded it. The fact
remains, they love each other. It's hard, but it's fatal."

Mrs. Keith lost patience. "Don't try the heroic; you'll break down," she
cried. "You're the best of men, but I'll warrant you no saint. To begin
with, Hubert doesn't love her. He loves no one but himself! Nora must
find her happiness where women as good have found it before this, in a
sound, sensible marriage. She can't marry Hubert; he's engaged to
another person. Yes, I have the facts; a young girl in New York with
whom he has been off and on for a couple of years, but who holds him to
his bargain. I wish her joy of it! He's not to be pitied; she's not
Nora, but she's a nice girl, and she's to have money. So good-by to
Hubert! As for you, cut the knot! She's a bit sentimental just now; but
one sentiment, at that age, is as good as another! And, my dear man, the
girl has a conscience, it's to be hoped; give her a chance to show it. A
word to the wise!"

Thus exhorted, Roger determined to act. The next day was a Sunday. While
the ladies were at church he took up his position in their drawing-room.
Nora came in alone; Mrs. Keith had made a pretext for ascending to her
own room, where she waited, breathing stout prayers. "I'm glad to find
you," Nora said. "I have been wanting particularly to speak to you.
Isn't my probation over? Can't I now come back?"

"It's about that," he answered, "that I came to talk to you. The
probation, Nora, has been mine. Has it lasted long enough! Do you love
me yet? Come back to me, come back to me as my wife."

She looked at him, as he spoke, with a clear, unfrightened gaze, and,
with his last words, broke frankly into a laugh. But as his own face was
intensely grave, a gradual blush arrested her laugh. "Your wife, Roger?"
she asked gently.

"My wife. I offer you my hand. Dear Nora, is it so incredible?"

To his uttermost meaning, somehow, her ear was still closed, as if she
fancied he was half joking. "Is that the only condition on which we can
live together?"

"The only one -- for me!"

She looked at him, still sounding his eyes with her own. But his
passion, merciful still, retreated before her frank doubt. "Ah," she
said, smiling, "what a pity I have grown up!"

"Well," he said, "since you're grown we must make the best of it. Think
of it, Nora, think of it. I'm not so old, you know. I was young when we
begun. You know me so well; you'd be safe. It would simplify matters
vastly; it's at least to think of," he went on, pleading for very
tenderness, in this pitiful minor key. "I know it must seem odd; but I
make you the offer!"

Nora was painfully startled. In this strange new character of a lover
she seemed to see him eclipsed as a friend, now when, in the trouble of
her love, she turned longingly to friendship. She was silent awhile,
with her embarrassment. "Dear Roger," she answered, at last, "let me
love you in the old, old way. Why need we change? Nothing is so good, so
safe as that. I thank you from my heart for your offer. You've given me
too much already. Marry any woman you please, and I'll be her
serving-maid."

He had no heart to meet her eyes; he had wrought his own fate.
Mechanically, he took up his hat and turned away, without speaking. She
looked at him an instant, uncertain, and then, loath to part with him so
abruptly, she laid her arm round his neck. "You don't think me unkind?"
she said. "I'll do anything for you on earth" -- "but that," was unspoken,
yet Roger heard it. The dream of years  was shattered; he felt
sick; he was dumb. "You forgive me?" she went on. "O Roger, Roger!" and,
with a strange inconsequence of lovingness, she dropped her head on his
shoulder. He held her for a moment as close as he had held his hope, and
then released her as suddenly as he had parted with it. Before she knew
it, he was gone.

Nora drew a long breath. It had all come and gone so fast that she was
bewildered. It had been what she had heard called a "chance." Suppose
she had grasped at it? She felt a kind of relief in the thought that she
had been wise. That she had been cruel, she never suspected. She watched
Roger, from the window, cross the street and take his way up the sunny
slope. Two ladies passed him, friends as Nora saw; but he made no bow.
Suddenly Nora's reflections deepened and the scene became portentous. If
she had been wrong, she had been horribly wrong. She hardly dared to
think of it. She ascended to her own room, to counsel with familiar
privacy. In the hall, as she passed, she found Mrs. Keith at her open
door. This lady put her arm round her waist, led her into the chamber
toward the light. "Something has happened," she said, looking at her
curiously.

"Yes, I've had an offer. From Roger."

"Well, well?" Mrs. Keith was puzzled by her face.

"Isn't he good? To think he should have thought it necessary! It was
soon settled."

"Settled, dearest? How?"

"Why -- why -- " And Nora began to smile the more resolutely, as her
imagination had taken alarm. "I declined."

Mrs. Keith released her with a gesture almost of repulsion. "Declined?
Unhappy girl!" The words were charged with a sort of righteous
indignation so unusual to the speaker, that Nora's conscience took the
hint.

She turned very pale. "What have I done?" she asked, appealingly.

"Done, my dear? You've done a blind, cruel act! Look here." And Mrs.
Keith having hastily ransacked a drawer, turned about with an open
letter. "Read that and repent."

Nora took the letter; it was old and crumpled, the ink faded. She
glanced at the date, -- that of her first school-year. In a moment she had
read to the closing sentence. "It will be my own fault if I haven't a
perfect wife." In a moment more its heavy meaning overwhelmed her; its
vital spark flashed back over the interval of years. She seemed to see
Roger's bent, stunned head in the street. Mrs. Keith was frightened at
her work. Nora dropped the letter and stood staring, open-mouthed, pale
as death, with her poor young face blank with horror.

NORA frequently wondered in after years how that Sunday afternoon had
worked itself away; how, through the tumult of amazement and grief,
decision, illumination, action had finally come. She had disembarrassed
herself of a vague attempt of Mrs. Keith's towards some compensatory
caress, and making her way half blindly to her own room, had sat down
face to face with her trouble. Here, if ever, was thunder from a clear
sky. Her friend's disclosure took time to swell to its full magnitude;
for an hour she sat, half stunned, seeming to see it climb heaven-high
and glare upon her like some monstrous blighting sun. Then at last she
broke into a cry and wept. For an hour she poured out her tears; the
ample flood seemed to purge and unchoke the channel of thought. Her
immense pain gushed and filtered through her heart and passed out in
shuddering sobs. The whole face of things was hideously altered; a
sudden chasm had yawned in that backward outlook of her life which had
seemed to command the very headspring of domestic security. Between the
world and her, much might happen; between her and Roger, nothing! She
felt horribly deluded and injured; the sense of suffered wrong absorbed
for the time the thought of wrong inflicted. She was too weak for
indignation, but she overflowed with a tenderness of reproach which
contained the purest essence of resentment. That Roger, whom all these
years she had fancied as simple as charity, should have been as double
as interest, should have played a part and laid a train, that she had
been living in darkness, in illusion, on lies, was a sickening,
tormenting thought. The worst of the worst was, that she had been
cheated of the chance to be really loyal. Why had he never told her that
she wore a chain? Why, when he took her, had he not drawn up his terms
and made his bargain? She would have kept it, she would have taught
herself to be his wife. Duty then would have been duty; sentiment would
have been sentiment; her youth would not have been so wretchedly
misspent. She would have surrendered her heart gladly in its youth;
doubtless it would have learned to beat to a decent and satisfied
measure; but now it had throbbed to a finer music, a melody that would
ring in her ears forever. But she had challenged conscience, poor girl,
in retrospect; at the very  whisper of its name, it stood before
her as a living fact. Suddenly, with an agonizing moral convulsion, she
found herself dedicating her tears to her own want of faith. She it was
who had been cruel, cunning, heedless of a sacred obligation. The longer
she gazed at the situation, the more without relief or issue it seemed
to her; the more densely compounded of their common fatal want of
wisdom. That out of it now, on her part, repentance and assent should
spring, seemed as a birth of folly out of chaos. Was she to be startled
back into a marriage which experience had overpassed? Yet what should
she do? To be what she had been, and to be what Roger wished her to be,
were now alike impossible. While she turned in her pain, longing somehow
to act, Mrs. Keith knocked at the door. Nora repaired to the
dressing-glass, to efface the traces of her tears; and while she stood
there, she saw in her open dressing-case her last letter from her
cousin. It supplied the thought she was vaguely groping for. By the time
she had crossed the room and opened the door, she had welcomed and
blessed this thought; and while she gravely shook her head in response
to Mrs. Keith's softly urgent, "Nora, dear, won't you let me come to
you?" she had passionately embraced it. "I had rather be alone," she
said; "I thank you very much."

It was nearly six o'clock; Mrs. Keith was dressed for the evening. It
was her gracious practice on Sundays to dine with her mother-in-law.
Nora knew, therefore, that if her companion accepted this present
dismissal, she would be alone for several hours.

"Can't I do something for you?" Mrs. Keith inquired, soothingly.

"Nothing at all, thank you. You're very kind."

Mrs. Keith looked at her, wondering whether this was the irony of bitter
grief; but a certain cold calmness in the young girl's face, overlying
her agitation, seemed to intimate that she had taken a wise resolve.
And, in fact, Nora was now soaring sublime on the wings of purpose, and
viewed Mrs. Keith's offence as a diminished fact. Mrs. Keith took her
hands. "Write him a line, my dear," she gently adjured.

Nora nodded. "Yes, I will write him a line."

"And when I come back, it will be all over?"

"Yes, -- all over."

"God bless you, my dear." And on this theological gracieusete the two
women kissed and separated. Nora returned to her dressing-case and read
over her cousin's letter. Its clear friendliness seemed to ring out
audibly amid this appalling hush of the harmonies of life. "I wish you
might know a day's friendliness or a day's freedom, yours without
question, without condition, and till death." Here was the voice of
nature, of appointed protection; the sound of it aroused her early sense
of native nearness to her cousin; had he been at hand she would have
sought a wholesome refuge in his arms. She sat down at her
writing-table, with her brow in her hands, light-headed with her
passionate purpose, steadying herself to think. A day's freedom had come
at last; a lifetime's freedom confronted her. For, as you will have
guessed, immediate retrocession and departure had imperiously prescribed
themselves. Until this had taken place, there could be nothing but
deeper trouble. On the old terms there could be no clearing up; she
could speak to Roger again only in perfect independence. She must throw
off those suffocating bounties which had been meant to hold her to the
service in which she had so miserably failed. Her failure now she felt
no impulse to question, her decision no energy to revise. I shall have
told my story ill if these things seem to lack logic. The fault lay
deeper and dated from longer ago than her morning's words of denial.
Roger and she shared it between them; it was a heavy burden for both. He
had wondered, we may add, whether that lurking force which gave her the
dignity that entranced him was humility  or pride. Would he have
wondered now?

She wrote her "line," as she had promised Mrs. Keith, rapidly, without
erasure; then wrote another to Mrs. Keith, folded and directed them and
laid them on her dressing-table. She remembered now, distinctly, that
she had heard of a Sunday-evening train to New York. She hastened down
stairs, found in a newspaper the railway advertisement, and learned that
the train started at eight; satisfied herself, too, that the coast was
clear of servants, and that she might depart unquestioned. She bade a
gleeful farewell to her borrowed possessions, vain bribes, ineffective
lures. She exchanged the dress she had worn to church for an old black
silk one, put a few articles of the first necessity into a small
travelling-bag, and emptied her purse of all save a few dollars. Then
bonneted, shawled, veiled, with her bag in her hand, she went forth into
the street. She would begin as she would have to proceed; she started
for the station, savingly, on foot. Happily it was not far off; she
reached it through the wintry darkness, out of breath, but in safety.
She seemed to feel about her, as she went, the reckless makeshift
atmosphere of her childhood. She was once more her father's daughter.
She bought her ticket and found a seat in the train without adventure;
with a sort of shame, in fact, that this great deed of hers should be so
easy to do. But as the train rattled hideously through the long wakeful
hours of the night, difficulties came thickly; in the mere oppression of
her conscious purpose, in the keener vision at moments of Roger's
distress, in a vague dread of the great unknown into which she was
rushing. But she could do no other, -- no other; with this refrain she
lulled her doubts. It was strange how, as the night elapsed and her
heart-beats seemed to keep time to the crashing swing of the train, her
pity grew for her friend. It would have been a vast relief to be able to
hate him. Her undiminished affection, forced back on her heart, swelled
and rankled there tormentingly. But unable to hate Roger, she could at
least abuse herself. Every fact of the last six years, in this new
light, seemed to glow like a portent of that morning scene, and, in
contrast, her own insensibility seemed to mantle with the duskiness of
sin. She felt a passionate desire to redeem herself by work, -- work of
any kind, at any cost, -- the harder, the humbler the better. Her music,
she deemed, would have a marketable value; she would write to Miss
Murray, her former teacher, and beg her to employ her or recommend her.
Her lonely life would borrow something of the dignity it so sadly needed
from teaching scales to little girls in pinafores. Meanwhile George,
George, was the word. She kept his letter clinched in her hand during
half the journey. But among all these things she found time to think of
one who was neither George nor Roger. Hubert Lawrence had wished in
memorable accents that he had known her friendless and helpless. She
imagined now that her placid dependence had stirred his contempt. But
for this, he might have cut the knot of her destiny. As she thought of
him it seemed not misery, but happiness, to be wandering forth alone.
She wished he might see her sitting there in poverty; she wondered
whether there was a chance of her meeting him in New York. She would
tell him then that she understood and forgave him. What had seemed
cruelty was in fact magnanimity; for, of course, he had learned Roger's
plan, and on this ground had renounced. She wondered whether she might
properly let him know that she was free.

Toward morning, weariness mastered her and she fell asleep. She was
aroused by a great tumult and the stopping of the train. It had arrived.
She found with dismay that, as it was but seven o'clock, she had two or
three hours on her hands. George would hardly be at his place of
business before ten, and the interval seemed formidable.  The dusk
of a winter's morning lingered still, and increased her trouble.
But she followed her companions and stood in the street. Half a dozen
hackmen attacked her; a facetious gentleman, lighting a cigar, asked her
if she wouldn't take a carriage with him.

She made her escape from the bustle and hurried along the street,
praying to be unnoticed. She told herself sternly that now her
difficulties had begun and must be bravely faced; but as she stood at
the street-corner, beneath an unextinguished lamp, listening to the
nascent hum of the town, she felt a most unreasoned sinking of the
heart. A Dutch grocer, behind her, was beginning to open his shop; an
ash-barrel stood beside her, and while she lingered an old woman with a
filthy bag on her back came and poked in it with a stick; a policeman,
muffled in a comforter, came lounging squarely along the pavement and
took her slender measure with his hard official eye. What a hideous
sordid world! She was afraid to do anything but walk and walk.
Fortunately, in New York, in the upper region, it is impossible to lose
one's way; and she knew that by keeping downward and to the right she
would reach her appointed refuge. The streets looked shabby and of
ill-repute; the houses seemed mean and sinister. When, to fill her time,
she stopped before the window of a small shop, the objects within
seemed, in their ugliness, to mock at the delicate needs begotten of
Roger's teaching, and now come a-begging. At last she began to feel
faint and hungry, for she had fasted since the previous morning. She
ventured into an establishment which had Ladies' Cafe inscribed in
gilt letters on a blue tablet in the window, and justified its title by
an exhibition of stale pies and fly-blown festoons of tissue-paper. On
her request, humbly preferred, for a cup of tea, she was served
staringly and condescendingly by a half-dressed young woman, with frowzy
hair and tumid eyes. The tea was bad, yet Nora swallowed it, not to
complicate the situation. The young woman had come and sat down at her
table, handled her travelling-bag, and asked a number of plain
questions; among others, if she wouldn't like to go up and lie down. "I
guess it's a dollar," said this person, to conclude her achievements,
alluding to the cup of tea. Nora came afterwards to a square, in which
was an enclosure containing trees, a frozen fountain, thawing fast, and
benches. She went in and sat down on one of the benches. Several of the
others were occupied by shabby men, sullen with fasting, with their
hands thrust deep into their pockets, swinging their feet for warmth.
She felt a faint fellowship in their grim idleness; but the fact that
they were all men and she the only woman, seemed to open out deeper
depths in her loneliness. At last, when it was nine o'clock, she made
her way to Tenth Avenue and to George's address. It was a neighborhood
of storehouses and lumber-yards, of wholesale traffic in articles she
had never heard of, and of multitudinous carts, drawn up along the
pavement. She found a large cheap-looking sign in black and
white, -- Franks and Fenton. Beneath it was an alley, and at the end of
this alley a small office which seemed to communicate with an extension
of the precinct in the rear. The office was open; a small ragged boy was
sweeping it with a broom. From him she learned that neither Franks nor
Fenton had arrived, but that if she wanted, she might come in and wait.
She sat down in a corner, tremulous with conjecture, and scanned the
room, trying to bridge over this dull interval with some palpable
memento of her cousin. But the desk, the stove, the iron safe, the
chairs, the sordid ink-spotted walls, were as blank and impersonal as so
many columns of figures. When at last the door opened and a man
appeared, it was not Fenton, but, presumably, Franks. Mr. Franks was a
small meagre man, with a whitish coloring, weak blue eyes and thin
yellow whiskers,  laboring apparently under a chronic form of that
malady vulgarly known as the "fidgets," the opening steps of Saint
Vitus's dance. He nodded, he stumbled, he jerked his arms and legs about
with pitiful comicality. He had a huge protuberant forehead, such a
forehead as would have done honor to a Goethe or a Newton; but poor Mr.
Franks must have been at best a man of genius manque. In other words,
he was next door to a fool. He informed Nora, on learning her errand,
that his partner ("pardner" he called it) was gone to Williamsburg on
business, and would not return till noon; meanwhile, was it anything he
could do? Nora's heart sank at this vision of comfort still deferred;
but she thanked Mr. Franks, and begged leave to sit in her corner and
wait. Her presence seemed to redouble his agitation; she remained for an
hour gazing in painful fascination at his grotesque shrugs and spasms,
as he busied himself at his desk. The Muse of accounts, for poor Mr.
Franks, was, in fact, not habitually a young woman, thrice beautiful
with trouble, sitting so sensibly at his elbow. Nora wondered how George
had come to marry his strength to such weakness; then she guessed that
it was his need of capital that had discovered a secret affinity with
Mr. Franks's need of brains. The merciless intensity of thought begotten
by her excitement suggested the dishonorable color of this connection.
From time to time Mr. Franks wheeled about in his chair and fixed her
solemnly with his pallid glance, as if to offer her the privilege of
telling him her story; and on her failure to avail herself of it, turned
back to his ledger with a little grunt of injury and a renewal of his
vacant nods and becks. As the morning wore away, various gentlemen of
the kind designated as "parties" came in and demanded Fenton, quite over
Mr. Franks's restless head. Several of them sat awhile on tilted chairs,
chewing their toothpicks, stroking their beards, and listening with a
half-bored grin to what appeared to be an intensely confidential
exposition of Mr. Franks's wrongs. One of them, as he departed, gave
Nora a wink, as if to imply that the state of affairs between the two
members of the firm was so broad a joke that even a pretty young woman
might enjoy it. At last, when they had been alone again for half an
hour, Mr. Franks closed with a slap the great leathern flanks of his
account-book, and sat a moment burying his head in his arms. Then he
suddenly rose and stood before the young girl. "Mr. Fenton's your
cousin, Miss, you say, eh? Well, then, let me tell you that your
cousin's a rascal! I can prove it to you on them books! Where is my
money, thirty thousand dollars that I put into this d -- d humbug of a
business? What is there to show for it? I've been made a fool of, -- as if
I wasn't fool enough already." The tears stood in his eyes, he stamped
with the bitterness of his spite; and then thrusting his hat on his head
and giving Nora's amazement no time to reply, he darted out of the door
and went up the alley. Nora saw him from the window, looking up and down
the street. Suddenly, while he stood and while she looked, George came
up. Mr. Franks's fury seemed suddenly to evaporate; he received his
companion's hand-shake and nodded toward the office, as if to tell of
Nora's being there; while, to her surprise, George hereupon, without
looking toward the window, turned back into the street. In a few
minutes, however, he reappeared alone, and in another moment he stood
before her. "Well!" he cried; "here's a sensation!"

"George," she said, "I've taken you at your word."

"My word? O yes!" cried George, bravely.

She instantly perceived that he was changed, and not for the better. He
looked older, he was better dressed and more prosperous; but as Nora
glanced at him, she felt that she had asked too much of her heart. In
fact, George was the same George, only  more so, as the phrase is.
The lapse of a year and a half had hammered him hard. His face had
acquired the settled expression of a man turning over a hard bargain
with cynical suspicion. He looked at Nora from head to foot, and in a
moment he had noted her simple dress and her pale face. "What on earth
has happened?" he asked, closing the door with a kick.

Nora hesitated, feeling that, with words, tears might come.

"You're sick," he said, "or you will be."

This horrible idea helped her to recall her self-control. "I've left Mr.
Lawrence," she said.

"So I see!" said George, wavering between relish and disapproval. When,
a few moments before, his partner had told him that a young lady was in
the office, calling herself his cousin, he had straightway placed
himself on his guard. The case was delicate; so that, instead of
immediately advancing, he had retreated behind a green baize door twenty
yards off, had "taken something," and briskly meditated. She had taken
him at his word: he knew that before she told him. But confound his
word, if it came to this! It had been meant, not as an invitation to put
herself under his care, but as a simple high-colored hint of his
standing claims. George, however, had a native sympathy with positive
measures; Nora evidently had engaged in one which, as such, might yield
profit. "How do you stand?" he asked. "Have you quarrelled?"

"Don't call it a quarrel, George! He's as kind, he's kinder than ever!"
Nora cried. "But what do you think? He has asked me to marry him."

"Eh, my dear, I told you so!"

"I didn't believe you! I ought to have believed you. But it isn't only
that. It is that, years ago, he adopted me with that view. He brought me
up for that purpose. He has done everything for me on that condition. I
was to pay my debt and be his wife! I never dreamed of it. And now at
last that I'm a woman grown and he makes his demand, I can't, I can't!"

"You can't, eh? So you've left him!"

"Of course I've left him. It was the only thing to do. It was give and
take. I can't give what he wants, nor can I give back all I have
received. But I can refuse to take more."

Fenton sat on the edge of his desk, swinging his leg. He folded his arms
and whistled a lively air, looking at Nora with a brightened eye. "I
see, I see," he said.

Telling her tale had deepened her color and added to her beauty. "So
here I am," she went on. "I know that I'm dreadfully alone, that I'm
homeless and helpless. But it's a heaven to living as I have lived. I
have been content all these days, because I thought I could content him.
But we never understood each other. He has given me immeasurable
happiness; I know that; and he knows that I know it; don't you think he
knows, George?" she cried, eager even in her reserve. "I would have made
him a sister, a friend. But I don't expect you to understand all this.
It's enough that I'm satisfied. I'm satisfied," the poor girl repeated
vehemently. "I'm not going into the heroics; you can trust me, George. I
mean to earn my own living. I can teach; I'm a good musician; I want
above all things to work. I shall look for some employment without
delay. All this time I might have been writing to Miss Murray. But I was
sick with impatience to see you. To come to you was the only thing I
could do; but I shan't trouble you for long."

Fenton seemed to have but half caught the meaning of this impassioned
statement, for simple admiration of her radiant purity of purpose was
fast getting the better of his caution. He gave his knee a loud slap.
"Nora," he said, "you're a great girl!"

For a moment she was silent and thoughtful. "For heaven's sake," she
cried at last, "say nothing to make me feel that I have done this thing
 too easily, too proudly and recklessly! Really, I'm anything but
brave. I'm full of doubts and fears."

"You're beautiful; that's one sure thing!" said Fenton. "I'd rather
marry you than lose you. Poor Lawrence!" Nora turned away in silence and
walked to the window, which grew to her eyes, for the moment, as the
"glimmering square" of the poet. "I thought you loved him so!" he added,
abruptly. Nora turned back with an effort and a blush. "If he were to
come to you now," he went on, "and go down on his knees and beg and
plead and rave and all that sort of thing, would you still refuse him?"

She covered her face with her hands. "O George, George!" she cried.

"He'll follow you, of course. He'll not let you go so easily."

"Possibly; but I have begged him solemnly to let me take my way. Roger
isn't one to rave and rage. At all events, I shall refuse to see him
now. A year hence, perhaps. His great desire will be, of course, that I
don't suffer. I shan't suffer."

"By Jove, not if I can help it!" cried Fenton, with warmth. Nora
answered with a faint, grave smile, and stood looking at him, invoking
by her helpless silence some act of high protection. He colored beneath
her glance with the pressure of his thoughts. They resolved themselves
chiefly into the recurring question, "What can be made of it?" While he
was awaiting inspiration, he took refuge in a somewhat inexpensive piece
of gallantry. "By the way, you must be hungry."

"No, I'm not hungry," said Nora, "but I'm tired. You must find me a
lodging -- in some quiet hotel."

"O, you shall be quiet enough," he answered; but he insisted that
unless, meanwhile, she took some dinner, he should have her ill on his
hands. They quitted the office, and he hailed a hack, which drove them
over to the upper Broadway region, where they were soon established in a
well-appointed restaurant. They made, however, no very hearty meal.
Nora's hunger of the morning had passed away in fever, and Fenton
himself was, as he would have expressed it, off his feed. Nora's head
had begun to ache; she had removed her bonnet, and sat facing him at
their small table, leaning wearily against the wall, her plate
neglected, her arms folded, her bright eyes expanded with her trouble
and consulting the uncertain future. He noted narrowly her splendid gain
of beauty since their parting; but more even than by this he was struck
by her brave playing of her part, and by the purity and mystery of moral
temper it implied. It belonged to a line of conduct in which he felt
no commission to dabble; but in a creature of another sort he was free
to admire these luxuries of conscience. In man or woman the capacity
then and there to act was the thing he most relished. Nora had not
faltered and wavered; she had chosen, and here she sat. He felt a sort
of rage that he was not the manner of man for whom such a woman might so
choose, and that his own temper was pitched in so much lower a key; for
as he looked askance at her beautiful absent eyes, he more than
suspected that there was a positive as well as a negative side to her
refusal of her friend. To refuse Roger, favored as Roger was, her heart,
at least, must have accepted another. It was love, and not indifference,
that had pulled the wires of her adventure. Fenton, as we have
intimated, was one who, when it suited him, could ride rough-shod to his
mark. "You've told me half your story," he said, "but your eyes tell the
rest. You'll not be Roger's wife, but you'll not die an old maid."

She started, and her utmost effort at self-control was unable to banish
a beautiful guiltiness from her blush. "To what you can learn from my
eyes you are welcome," she said. "Though they may compromise me, they
won't any one else."

"My dear girl," he said, "I religiously respect your secrets." But, in
truth, he only half respected them. Stirred as he was by her beauty and
 by that sense of feminine appeal which to a man who retains aught
of the generosity of manhood is the most inspiring of all motives, he
was keenly mortified by the feeling that her tenderness passed him by,
barely touching him with the hem of its garment. She was doing mighty
fine things, but she was using him, her hard, shabby cousin, as a
senseless stepping-stone. These reflections quickened his appreciation
of her charm, but took the edge from his delicacy. As they rose to go,
Nora, who in spite of her absent eyes had watched him well, felt that
cousinship was but a name. George had been to her maturer vision a
singular disappointment. His face, from the moment of their meeting, had
given her warning to withdraw her trust. Was it she or he who had
changed since that fervid youthful parting of sixteen months before?
She, in the interval, had been refined by life; he had been vulgarized.
She had seen the world. She had known better things and better men; she
had known Hubert, and, more than ever, she had known Roger. But as she
drew on her gloves she reflected with horror that trouble was making her
fastidious. She wished to be coarse and careless; she wished that she
might have eaten a heavy dinner, that she might enjoy taking George's
arm. And the slower flowed the current of her confidence, the softer
dropped her words. "Now, dear George," she said, with a desperate
attempt at a cheerful smile, "let me know where you mean to take me."

"Upon my soul, Nora," he said, with a hard grin, "I feel as if I had a
jewel I must lay in soft cotton. The thing is to find it soft enough."
With George himself, perhaps, she might make terms; but she had a
growing horror of his friends. Among them, probably, were the female
correlatives of the men who had come to chat with Mr. Franks. She prayed
he might not treat her to company. "You see I want to do the pretty
thing," he went on. "I want to treat you, by Jove, as I'd treat a queen!
I can't thrust you all alone into a hotel, and I can't put up at one
with you, -- can I?"

"I'm not in a position now to be fastidious," said Nora. "I shan't
object to going alone."

"No, no!" he cried, with a flourish of his hand. "I'll do for you what
I'd do for my own sister. I'm not one of your pious boys, but I know the
decencies. I live in the house of a lady who lets out rooms, -- a very
nice little woman; she and I are great cronies; I'm sure you'll like
her. She'll make you as snug as you ever were with our friend Roger! A
female companion for a lonely girl is never amiss, you know. She's a
first-rate little woman. You'll see!"

Nora's heart sank, but she assented. They re-entered their carriage, and
a drive of moderate length brought them to a brown-stone dwelling of the
third order of gentility, as one may say, stationed in a cheap and
serried row. In a few moments, in a small tawdry front parlor, Nora was
introduced to George's hostess, the nice little woman, Mrs. Paul by
name. Nice enough she seemed, for Nora's comfort. She was youngish and
fair, plump and comely, with a commendable air of remote widowhood. She
was a trifle too loving on short acquaintance, perhaps; but, after all,
thought Nora, who was she now, to complain of that? When the two women
had gone up stairs, Fenton put on his hat, -- he could never meditate
without it (he had written that last letter to Nora with his beaver
resting on the bridge of his nose), -- and paced slowly up and down the
narrow entry, chewing the end of a cigar, with his hands in his pockets
and his eyes on the ground. In ten minutes Mrs. Paul reappeared. "Well,
sir," she cried, "what does all this mean?"

"It means money, if you'll not scream so loud," he answered. "Come in
here." They went into the parlor and remained there for a couple of
hours with closed doors. At last Fenton came forth and left the house.
He walked along the street, humming gently  to himself. Dusk had
fallen; he stopped beneath a lighted lamp at the corner, looked up and
down a moment, and then exhaled a deep, an almost melancholy sigh.
Having thus purged his conscience, he proceeded to business. He
consulted his watch; it was five o'clock. An empty hack rolled by; he
called it and got in, breathing the motto of great spirits, "Confound
the expense!" His business led him to visit successively several of the
upper hotels. Roger, he argued, starting immediately in pursuit of Nora,
would have taken the first train from Boston, and would now have been
more than an hour in town. Fenton could, of course, proceed only by
probabilities; but according to these, Roger was to be found at one of
the establishments aforesaid. Fenton knew his New York, and, from what
he knew of Roger, he believed him to be at the Brevoort House. Here, in
fact, he found his name freshly registered. He would give him time,
however; he would take time himself. He stretched his long legs awhile
on one of the divans in the hall. At last Roger appeared, strolling
gloomily down the corridor, with his eyes on the ground. For a moment
Fenton scarcely recognized him. He was pale and grave; distress had
already made him haggard. Fenton observed that, as he passed, people
stared at him. He walked slowly to the street door; whereupon Fenton,
fearing he might lose him, followed him, and stood for a moment behind
him. Roger turned suddenly, as if from an instinct of the other's
nearness, and the two faced each other. Those dumb eyes of Roger's for
once were eloquent. They glowed like living coals.

The good lady who enjoyed the sinecure of being mother-in-law to Mrs.
Keith passed on that especial Sunday an exceptionally dull evening. Her
son's widow was oppressed and preoccupied, and took an early leave. Mrs.
Keith's first question on reaching home was whether Nora had left her
room. On learning that she had quitted the house alone, after dark, Mrs.
Keith made her way, stirred by vague conjecture, to the empty chamber,
where, of course, she speedily laid her hands on those two testamentary
notes of which mention has been made. In a moment she had read the one
addressed to herself. Perturbed as she was, she yet could not repress an
impulse of intelligent applause. Ah, how character plays the cards! how
a fine girl's very errors set her off! If Roger longed for Nora to-day,
who could measure the morrow's longing? He might enjoy, however, without
waiting for the morrow, this refinement of desire. In spite of the late
hour, Mrs. Keith repaired to his abode, armed with the other letter,
deeming this, at such a moment, a more gracious course than to send for
him. The letter Roger found to be brief but pregnant. "Dear Roger," it
ran, "I learned this afternoon the secret of all these years, -- too late
for our happiness. I have been blind; you have been too
forbearing, -- generous where you should have been narrowly just. I never
dreamed of what this day would bring. Now, I must leave you; I can do
nothing else. This is no time to thank you for these years, but I shall
live to do so yet. Dear Roger, get married, and send me your children to
teach. I shall live by teaching. I have a family, you know; I go to N.
Y. to-night. I write this on my knees, imploring you to be happy. One of
these days, when I have learned to be myself again, we shall be better
friends than ever. I beg you solemnly not to follow me."

Mrs. Keith sat with her friend half the night in contemplation of this
prodigious fact. For the first time in her knowledge of him she saw
Roger violent, -- violent with horror and self-censure, and vain
imprecation of circumstance. But as the hours passed, she noted that
effect of which she had had prevision: the intenser heat of his passion,
the need to answer act with  act. He spoke of Nora with lowered
tones, with circumlocutions, as some old pagan of an unveiled goddess.
Consistency is a jewel; Mrs. Keith maintained in the teeth of the event
that she had given sound advice. "She'll have you yet," she said, "if
you let her alone. Take her at her word, -- don't follow her. Let her
knock against the world a little, and she'll make you a better wife for
this very escapade."

This philosophy seemed to Roger too stoical by half; to sit at home and
let Nora knock against the world was more than he could undertake. "Wife
or no wife," he said, "I must bring her back. I'm responsible for her to
Heaven. Good God! think of her afloat in that horrible city with that
rascal of a half cousin -- her family she calls him! -- for a pilot!" He
took, of course, the first train to New York. How to proceed, where to
look, was a hard question; but to linger and waver was agony. He was
haunted, as he went, with dreadful visions of what might have befallen
her; it seemed to him that he had hated her till now.

Fenton, as he recognized him, seemed a comfortable sight, in spite of
his detested identity. He was better than uncertainty. "You have news
for me!" Roger cried. "Where is she?"

Fenton looked about him at his leisure, feeling, agreeably, that now
he held the cards. "Gently," he said. "Hadn't we better retire?" Upon
which Roger, grasping his arm with grim devotion, led him to his own
bedroom. "I rather hit it," George went on. "I'm not the fool you once
tried to make me seem."

"Where is she, -- tell me that!" Roger demanded.

"Allow me, dear sir," said Fenton, settling himself in spacious vantage.
"If I've come here to oblige you, you must let me take my own way. You
don't suppose I've rushed to meet you out of pure gratitude! I owe it to
my cousin, in the first place, to say that I've come without her
knowledge."

"If you mean only to torture me," Roger answered, "say so outright. Is
she well? is she safe?"

"Safe? the safest woman in the city, sir! A delightful home, maternal
care!"

Roger wondered whether Fenton was making horrible sport of his trouble;
he turned cold at the thought of maternal care of his providing. But he
cautioned himself to lose nothing by arrogance. "I thank you extremely
for your kindness. Nothing remains but that I should see her."

"Nothing indeed! You're very considerate. You know that she particularly
objects to seeing you."

"Possibly! But that's for her to say. I claim the right to take the
refusal from her own lips."

Fenton looked at him with an impudent parody of compassion. "Don't you
think you've had refusals enough? You must enjoy 'em!"

Roger turned away with an imprecation, but he continued to swallow his
impatience. "Mr. Fenton," he said, "you have not come here, I know, to
waste words, nor have I to waste temper. You see before you a desperate
man. Come, make the most of me! I'm willing, I'm delighted, to be
fleeced! You'll help me, but not for nothing. Name your terms."

It is odd how ugly a face our passions, our projects may wear, reflected
in other minds, dressed out by other hands. Fenton scowled and flinched,
all but repudiated. To save the situation as far as possible, he
swaggered. "Well, you see," he answered, "my assistance is worth
something. Let me explain how much. You'll not guess! I know your story;
Nora has told me everything, -- everything! We've had a great talk, I can
tell you! Let me give you a little hint of my story, -- and excuse
egotism! You proposed to her; she refused you. You offered her money,
luxury, a position. She knew you, she liked you enormously, yet she
refused you flat! Now reflect on this."

There was something revolting to  Roger in seeing his adversary
profaning these sacred mysteries; he protested. "I have reflected,
abundantly. You can tell me nothing. Her affections," he added, stiffly,
to make an end of it, "were pre-engaged."

"Exactly! You see how that complicates matters. Poor, dear little Nora!"
And Fenton gave a twist to his mustache. "Imagine, if you can, how a man
placed as I am feels toward a woman, -- toward the woman! If he
reciprocates, it's love, it's passion, it's what you will, but it's
common enough! But when he doesn't repay her in kind, when he can't,
poor devil, it's -- it's -- upon my word," cried Fenton, slapping his knee,
"it's chivalry!"

For some moments Roger failed to appreciate the astounding purport of
these observations; then, suddenly, it dawned upon him. "Do I understand
you," he asked, in a voice gentle by force of wonder, "that you are
the man?"

Fenton squared himself in his chair. "You've hit it, sir. I'm the
man, -- the happy, the unhappy man. Damn it, sir, it's not my fault!"

Roger stood lost in tumultuous silence; Fenton felt his eyes penetrating
him to the core. "Excuse me," said Roger, at last, "if I suggest your
giving me some slight evidence of this extraordinary fact!"

"Evidence? isn't there evidence enough and to spare? When a young girl
gives up home and friends and fortune and -- and reputation, and rushes
out into the world to throw herself into a man's arms, you may make a
note of her preference, I think! But if you'll not take my word, you may
leave it! I may look at the matter once too often, let me tell you! I
admire Nora with all my heart; I worship the ground she treads on; but I
confess I'm afraid of her; she's too good for me; she was meant for a
finer gentleman than I! By which I don't mean you, of necessity. But
you have been good to her, and you have a claim. It has been cancelled,
in a measure; but you wish to re-establish it. Now you see that I stand
in your way; that if I had a mind to, I might stand there forever! Hang
it, sir, I'm playing the part of a saint. I have but a word to say to
settle my case, and yours too! But I have my eye on a lady neither so
young nor so pretty as my cousin, but whom I can marry with a better
conscience, for she expects no more than I can give her. Nevertheless, I
don't answer for myself. A man isn't a saint by the week! Talk about
conscience when a beautiful girl sits gazing at you through a mist of
tears! O, you have yourself to thank for it all! A year and a half ago,
if you hadn't treated me like a sharper, Nora would have been content to
treat me like a cousin. But women have a fancy for an outlaw. You turned
me out of doors, and Nora's heart went with me. It has followed me ever
since. Here I sit with my ugly face and hold it in my hand. As I say, I
don't quite know what to do with it. You propose an arrangement, I
inquire your terms. A man loved is a man listened to. If I were to say
to Nora to-morrow, My dear girl, you've made a mistake. You're in a
false position. Go back to Mr. Lawrence directly, and then we'll talk
about it! she'd look at me a moment with those eyes of hers, she'd
sigh, she'd gather herself up like a queen on trial for treason,
remanded to prison, -- and she'd march to your door. Once she's within it,
it's your own affair. That's what I can do. Now what can you do? Come,
something handsome!"

Fenton spoke loud and fast, as if to deepen and outstrip possible
self-contempt. Roger listened amazedly to this prodigious tissue of
falsity, impudence and greed, and at last, as Fenton paused, and he
seemed to see Nora's image blushing piteously beneath this heavy mantle
of dishonor, his disgust broke forth. "Upon my word, sir," he cried,
"you go too far; you ask too much. Nora in love with you, -- you who
haven't the grace even to lie decently! Tell me she's ill, she's lost,
she's dead; but don't tell me she  can fancy you for a moment an
honest man!"

Fenton rose and stood for a moment, glaring with anger at his vain
self-exposure. For an instant, Roger expected a tussle. But Fenton
deemed that he could deal harder vengeance than by his fists. "Very
good!" he cried. "You've chosen. I don't mind your words; you're a fool
at best, and of course you're twenty times a fool when you're put out by
a disagreeable truth. But you're not such a fool, I guess, as not to
repent!" And Fenton made a rather braver exit than you might have expected.

Roger's recent vigil with Mrs. Keith had been hideous enough; but he was
yet to learn that a sleepless night may contain deeper possibilities of
suffering. He had flung back Fenton's words, but they returned to the
charge. When once the gate is opened to self-torture, the whole army of
fiends files in. Before morning he had fairly out-Fentoned Fenton. There
he tossed, himself a living instance, if need were, of the furious
irresponsibility of passion; loving in the teeth of reason, of hope, of
justice almost, in blind obedience to a reckless personal need. Why, if
his passion scorned counsel, was Nora's bound to take it? We love as
we must, not as we should; and she, poor girl, had bowed to the common
law. In the morning he slept awhile for weariness, but he awoke to a
world of agitation. If Fenton's tale was true, and if, at Mrs. Keith's
instigation, his own suspicions had done Hubert wrong, he would go to
Hubert, pour out his woes, and demand aid and comfort. He must move to
find rest. Hubert's lodging was high up town; Roger started on foot. The
weather was perfect; one of those happy days of February which seem to
snatch a mood from May, -- a day when any sorrow is twice a sorrow. All
winter was a-melting; you heard on all sides, in the still sunshine, the
raising of windows; on the edges of opposing house-tops rested a vault
of vernal blue. Where was she hidden, in the vast bright city? Hideous
seemed the streets and houses and crowds which made gross distance of
their nearness. He would have beggared himself for the sound of her
voice, though her words might damn him. When at last he reached Hubert's
dwelling a sudden sense of all that he risked checked his steps. Hubert,
after all, and Hubert alone, was a possible rival, and it would be sad
work to put the torch in his hands! So he turned heavily back to the
Fifth Avenue and kept his way to the Park. Here, for some time he walked
about, heeding, feeling, seeing nothing but that garish nature mocked
his unsunned soul. At last he sat down on a bench. The delicious
mildness of the air almost sickened him. It was some time before he
perceived through the mist of his thoughts that two ladies had descended
from a carriage hard by, and were approaching his bench, -- the only one
near at hand. One of these ladies was of great age and evidently infirm;
she came slowly, leaning on her companion's arm; she wore a green shade
over her eyes. The younger lady, who was in the prime of youth and
beauty, supported her friend with peculiar tenderness. As Roger rose to
give them place, he dimly observed on the young lady's face a movement
of recognition, a smile, -- the smile of Miss Sandys! Blushing slightly,
she frankly greeted him. He met her with the best grace at his command,
and felt her eyes, as he spoke, scanning the trouble in his aspect.
"There is no need of my introducing you to my aunt," she said. "She has
lost her hearing, and her only pleasure is to bask in the sun." She
turned and helped this venerable invalid to settle herself on the bench,
put a shawl about her, and satisfied her feeble needs with filial
solicitude. At the end of ten minutes of commonplace talk, relieved
however by certain mutual glances of a subtler complexion, Roger felt
the presence of this fine woman closing about him like some softer moral
climate. At last these sympathetic eye-beams resolved themselves, on
Miss Sandys's  part, into speech. "You're either very unwell, Mr.
Lawrence, or very unhappy."

Roger hesitated an instant, under the empire of that stubborn aversion
to complaint which, in his character, was half modesty and half
philosophy. But Miss Sandys seemed to sit there eying him so like some
Muse of friendship that he answered simply, "I'm unhappy!"

"I was afraid it would come!" said Miss Sandys. "It seemed to me when we
met, a year ago, that your spirits were too good for this life. You know
you told me something which gives me the right -- I was going to say, to
be interested; let me say, at least, to be compassionate."

"I hardly remember what I told you. I only know that I admired you to a
degree which may very well have loosened my tongue."

"O, it was about the charms of another you spoke! You told me about the
young girl to whom you had devoted yourself."

"I was dreaming then; now I'm awake!" Roger hung his head and poked the
ground with his stick. Suddenly he looked up, and she saw that his eyes
were filled with tears. "O Miss Sandys," he cried, "you've stirred deep
waters! Don't question me. I'm ridiculous with disappointment and sorrow!"

She gently laid her hand on his arm. "Let me hear it all! I assure you I
can't go away and leave you sitting here the same image of suicidal
despair I found you."

Thus urged, Roger told his story. In the clear still air of her
attention, it seemed to assume to his own vision a larger and more
palpable outline. As he talked, he worked off the superficial disorder
of his grief. He was forcibly struck, for the first time, with his own
great charity; the silent respect of his companion's gaze seemed to
attest it. When he came to speak of this dark contingency of Nora's love
for her cousin, he threw himself frankly upon Miss Sandys's pity, upon
her wisdom. "Is such a thing possible?" he asked. "Do you believe it?"

She raised her eyebrows. "You must remember that I know neither Miss
Lambert nor her kinsman. I can hardly risk a judgment; I can only say
this, that the general effect of your story is to diminish my esteem for
women, to elevate my opinion of men."

"O, except Nora on one side, and Fenton on the other! Nora's an angel!"

Miss Sandys gave a vexed smile. "Possibly! You're a man, and you ought
to have loved a woman. Angels have a good conscience guaranteed them;
they may do what they please! If I should except any one, it would be
Mr. Hubert Lawrence. I met him the other evening."

"You think it's Hubert then?" Roger demanded mournfully.

Miss Sandys broke into a warm laugh which seemed to Roger to sound the
emancipation of his puzzled spirit. "For an angel, Miss Lambert hasn't
lost her time on earth! But don't ask me for advice, Mr. Lawrence; at
least not now and here. Come and see me to-morrow, or this evening.
Don't regret having spoken; you may believe at least that the burden of
your grief is shared. It was too miserable that at such a time you
should be sitting here alone, feeding upon your own heart."

These seemed to Roger rich words; they lost nothing on the speaker's
lips. She was indeed admirably beautiful; her face, softened by
intelligent pity, was lighted by a gleam of tender irony of his
patience. Was he, after all, stupidly patient, ignobly fond? There was
in Miss Sandys something singularly assured and complete. Nora, in
momentary contrast, seemed a flighty school-girl. He looked about him,
vaguely invoking the bright empty air, longing for rest, yet dreading
forfeiture. He left his place and strolled across the dull-colored turf.
At the base of a tree, on its little bed of sparse raw verdure, he
suddenly spied the first violet  of the year. He stooped and picked
it; its mild firm tint was the color of friendship. He brought it back
to Miss Sandys, who now had risen with her companion and was preparing
to return to the carriage. He silently offered her the violet, -- a mere
pin's head of bloom; a passionate throb of his heart had told him that
this was all he could offer her. She took it with a sober smile; it
seemed pale beneath her deep eyes. "We shall see you again?" she said.

Roger felt himself blushing to his brows. He had a vision on either hand
of an offered cup, -- the deep-hued wine of illusion, -- the bitter draught
of constancy. A certain passionate instinct answered, -- an instinct
deeper than his wisdom, his reason, his virtue, -- deep as his love. "Not
now," he said. "A year hence!"

Miss Sandys turned away and stood for a full moment as motionless as
some sculptured statue of renunciation. Then, passing her arm
caressingly round her companion, "Come, dear aunt," she murmured; "we
must go." This little address to the stone-deaf dame was her single
tribute to confusion. Roger walked with the ladies to their carriage and
silently helped them to enter it. He noted the affectionate tact with
which Miss Sandys adjusted her movements to those of her companion. When
he lifted his hat, his friend bowed, as he fancied, with an air of
redoubled compassion. She had but imagined his prior loss, -- she knew his
present one! "Ah, she would make a wife!" he said, as the carriage
rolled away. He stood watching it for some minutes; then, as it wheeled
round a turn, he was seized with a deeper, sorer sense of his impotent
idleness. He would go to Hubert to accuse him, if not to appeal to him.

Nora, relieved of her hostess's company, turned the key in her door and
went through certain motions mechanically suggestive of her being at
rest and satisfied. She unpacked her little bag and repaired her
disordered toilet. She took out her writing-materials and prepared to
compose a letter to Miss Murray. But she had not written many words
before she lapsed into sombre thought. Now that she had seen George
again and judged him, she was coming rapidly to feel that to have
exchanged Roger's care for his care was, for the time, to have outraged
Roger. It may have been needful, but it was none the less a revolting
need. But it should pass quickly! She took refuge again in her letter
and begged for an immediate reply. From time to time, as she wrote, she
heard a step in the house, which she supposed to be George's; it somehow
quickened her pen and the ardor of her petition. This was just finished
when Mrs. Paul reappeared, bearing a salver charged with tea and
toast, -- a gracious attention, which Nora was unable to repudiate. The
lady took advantage of it to open a conversation. Mrs. Paul's overtures,
as well as her tea and toast, were the result of her close conference
with Fenton; but though his instructions had made a very pretty show as
he laid them down, they dwindled sensibly in the vivid glare of Nora's
mistrust. Mrs. Paul, nevertheless, seated herself bravely on the bed and
rubbed her plump pretty hands like the best little woman in the world.
But the more Nora looked at her, the less she liked her. At the end of
five minutes she had conceived a horror of her. It seemed to her that
she had met just such women in reports of criminal trials. She had
wondered what the heroines of these tragedies were like. Why, like Mrs.
Paul, of course! They had her comely stony face, her false smile, her
little tulle cap, which seemed forever to discredit coquetry. And here,
in her person, sat the whole sinister sisterhood on Nora's bed, calling
the young girl "my dear," wanting to take her hand and draw her out!
With a defiant flourish, Nora addressed her  letter with Miss
Murray's honest title: "I should like to have this posted, please," she
said.

"Give it to me, my dear; I'll attend to it," said Mrs. Paul; and
straightway read the address. "I suppose this is your old
schoolmistress. Mr. Fenton told me all about it." Then, after turning
the letter for a moment, "Keep it over a day!"

"Not an hour," said Nora, with decision. "My time is precious."

"Why, my dear," cried Mrs. Paul, "we shall be delighted to keep you a
month."

"You're very good. You know I've my living to make."

"Don't talk about that! I make my living, -- I know what it means! Come,
let me talk to you as a friend. Don't go too far. Suppose, now, you
repent? Six months hence, it may be too late. If you leave him lamenting
too long, he'll marry the first pretty girl he sees. They always do, -- a
man refused is just like a widower. They're not so faithful as the
widows! But let me tell you it's not every girl that gets such a chance;
if I'd had it, I wouldn't have split hairs! He'll love you the better,
you see, for your having led him a little dance. But he mustn't dance
too long! Excuse my breaking out this way; but Mr. Fenton and I, you
see, are great friends, and I feel as if his cousin was my cousin. Take
back this letter and give me just one word to post, -- Come! Poor little
man! You must have a high opinion of men, my dear, to think you hadn't
drawn a prize!"

If Roger had wished for a proof that sentiment survived in Nora's mind,
he would have found it in the disgust she felt at hearing Mrs. Paul
undertake his case. She colored with her sense of the defilement of
sacred things. George, surely, for an hour, at least, might have kept
her story intact. "Really, madam," she answered, "I can't discuss this
matter. I'm extremely obliged to you." But Mrs. Paul was not to be so
easily baffled. Poor Roger, roaming helpless and hopeless, would have
been amazed to hear how warmly his cause was a-pleading. Nora, of
course, made no attempt to argue the case. She waited till the lady had
exhausted her eloquence, and then, "I'm a very obstinate person," she
said; "you waste your words. If you go any further I shall feel
persecuted." And she rose, to signify that Mrs. Paul might do likewise.
Mrs. Paul took the hint, but in an instant she had turned about the hard
reverse of her fair face, in which defeated self-interest smirked
horribly. "Bah! you're a silly girl!" she cried; and swept out of the
room. Nora, after this, determined to avoid a second interview with
George. Her bad headache furnished a sufficient pretext for escaping it.
Half an hour later he knocked at her door, quite too loudly, she
thought, for good taste. When she opened it, he stood there, excited,
angry, ill-disposed. "I'm sorry you're ill," he said; "but a night's
rest will put you right. I've seen Roger."

"Roger! he's here?"

"Yes, he's here. But he don't know where you are. Thank the Lord you
left him! he's a brute!" Nora would fain have learned more, -- whether he
was angry, whether he was suffering, whether he had asked to see her;
but at these words she shut the door in her cousin's face. She hardly
dared think of what offered impertinence this outbreak of Fenton's was
the rebound. Her night's rest brought little comfort. Time seemed not to
cancel her disturbing thoughts, but to multiply them. She wondered
whether Roger had supposed George to be her appointed mediator, and
asked herself whether it was not her duty to see him once again and bid
him a respectfully personal farewell. It was a long time after she rose
before she could bring herself to leave her room. She had a vague hope
that if she delayed, her companions might have gone out. But in the
dining-room, in spite of the late hour, she found George gallantly
awaiting her. He had apparently had the discretion to dismiss Mrs. Paul
to the background, and apologized for her absence by saying that 
she had breakfasted long since and had gone to market. He seemed to have
slept off his wrath and was full of brotherly bonhomie. "I suppose
you'll want to know about Roger," he said, when they were seated at
breakfast. "He had followed you directly, in spite of your solemn
request; but not out of pure affection, I think. The little man's mad.
He expects you to back down and come to him on your knees, -- beg his
pardon and promise never to do it again. Pretty terms to marry a man on,
for a woman of spirit! But he doesn't know his woman, does he, Nora? Do
you know what he intimated? indeed, he came right out with it! That you
and I want to make a match! That you're in love with me, Miss, and ran
away to marry me. That we expected him to forgive us and endow us with a
pile of money. But he'll not forgive us, -- not he! We may starve, we and
our brats, before he looks at us. Much obliged! We shall thrive, for
many a year, as brother and sister, shan't we, Nora? and need neither
his money nor his pardon!"

In reply to this speech, Nora sat staring in pale amazement. "Roger
thought," she at last found words to say, "that it was to marry you I
refused him, -- to marry you I came to New York?"

Fenton, with seven-and-twenty years of impudence at his back, had
received in his day snubs and shocks of various shades of intensity; but
he had never felt in his face so chilling a blast of reprobation as this
cold disgust of Nora's. We know that the scorn of a lovely woman makes
cowards brave; it may do something towards making knaves honest men.
"Upon my word, my dear," he cried, "I'm sorry I hurt your feelings. It's
rough, but it's so!"

Nora wished in after years she had been able to laugh at this
disclosure; to pretend, at least, to a mirth she so little felt. But she
remained almost sternly silent, with her eyes on her plate, stirring her
tea. Roger, meanwhile, was walking about under this miserable error! Let
him think anything but that! "What did you reply," she asked, "to
this -- to this -- "

"To this handsome compliment? I replied that I only wished it were true;
but that I feared I had no such luck! Upon which he told me to go to the
Devil -- in a tone which implied that he didn't much care if you went with
me."

Nora listened to this speech in sceptical silence. "Where is Roger?" she
asked at last.

Fenton shot her a glance of harsh mistrust. "Where is he? What do you
want to know that for?"

"Where is he, please?" she simply repeated. And then, suddenly, she
wondered how and where it was the two men had happened to meet. "Where
did you find him?" she went on. "How did it happen?"

Fenton drained his cup of tea at one long gulp before he answered. "My
dear Nora," he said, "it's all very well to be modest, it's all very
well to be proud; but take care you're not ungrateful! I went purposely
to look him up. I was convinced he would have followed you, -- as I
supposed, to beg and beg and beg again. I wanted to say to him, She's
safe, she's happy, she's in the best hands. Don't waste your time, your
words, your hopes. Give her rope. Go quietly home and leave things to
me. If she turns homesick, I'll let you know. You see I'm frank, Nora;
that's what I meant to say. But I was received with this broadside. I
found a perfect bluster of injured vanity. You're her lover, she's your
mistress, and be d -- d to both of you!"

That George lied Nora did not distinctly say to herself, for she lacked
practice in this range of incrimination. But she as little said to
herself that this could be the truth. "I'm not ungrateful," she
answered, firmly. "But where was it?"

At this, George pushed back his chair. "Where -- where? Don't you believe
me? Do you want to go and  ask him if it's true? What are you,
anyway? Nora, who are you, where are you? Have you put yourself into my
hands or not?" A certain manly indignation was now kindled in his
breast; he was equally angry with Roger, with Nora, and with himself;
fate had offered him an overdose of contumely, and he felt a reckless,
savage impulse to wring from the occasion that compliment to his force
which had been so rudely denied to his delicacy. "Are you using me
simply as a vulgar tool? Don't you care for me the least little bit? Let
me suggest that for a girl in your -- your ambiguous position, you are too
proud, by several shades. Don't go back to Roger in a hurry! You're not
the unspotted maiden you were but two short days ago. Who am I, what am
I, to the people whose opinion you care for? A very low fellow, madam;
and yet with me you've gone far to cast your lot. If you're not prepared
to do more, you should have done less. Nora, Nora," he went on, breaking
into a vein none the less revolting for being more ardent, "I confess I
don't understand you! But the more you puzzle me the more you fascinate
me; and the less you like me the more I love you. What has there been,
anyway, between you and Lawrence? Hang me if I can understand! Are you
an angel of purity, or are you the most audacious of flirts?"

She had risen before he had gone far. "Spare me," she said, "the
necessity of hearing your opinions or answering your questions. Be a
gentleman! Tell me, I once more beg of you, where Roger is to be found?"

"Be a gentleman!" was a galling touch. He had gone too far to be a
gentleman; but in so far as a man means a bully, he might still be a
man. He placed himself before the door. "I refuse the information," he
said. "I don't mean to have been played with, to have been buffeted
hither by Roger and thither by you! I mean to make something out of all
this. I mean to request you to remain quietly in this room. Mrs. Paul
will keep you company. You didn't treat her over-well, yesterday; but,
in her way, she's quite as strong as you. Meanwhile I shall go to our
friend. She's locked up tight, I'll say; she's as good as in jail.
Give me five thousand dollars and I'll let her out. Of course he'll
drop a hint of the law. O, the law! not so fast. Two can play at that
game. Go to a magistrate and present your case. I'll go straight to the
Herald office and demand a special reporter and the very biggest
headings. That will rather take the bloom off your meeting. The public
don't mind details, Nora; it looks at things in the gross; and the gross
here is gross, for you! It won't hurt me!"

"Heaven forgive you!" murmured Nora, for all response to this explosion.
It made a hideous whirl about her; but she felt that to advance in the
face of it was her best safety. It sickened rather than frightened her.
She went to the door. "Let me pass!" she said.

Fenton stood motionless, leaning his head against the door, with his
eyes closed. She faced him a moment, looking at him intently. He seemed
hideous. "Coward!" she cried. He opened his eyes at the sound; for an
instant they met hers; then a burning blush blazed out strangely on his
dead complexion; he strode past her, dropped into a chair and buried his
face in his hands. "O God!" he cried. "I'm an ass!"

Nora made it the work of a single moment to reach her own room and fling
on her bonnet and shawl, of another to descend to the hall door. Once in
the street, she never stopped running till she had turned a corner and
put the house out of sight. She went far, hurried along by the ecstasy
of relief and escape, and it was some time before she perceived that
this was but half the question, and that she was now quite without
refuge. Thrusting her hand into her pocket to feel for her purse, she
found that she had left it in her room. Stunned and sickened  as
she was already, it can hardly be said that the discovery added to her
grief. She was being precipitated toward a great decision; sooner or
later made little difference. The thought of seeing Hubert Lawrence now
filled her soul. That, after what had passed between them, she should so
sorely need help, and yet not turn to him, seemed as great an outrage
against his professions as it was an impossibility to her own heart.
Reserve, prudence, mistrust, had melted away; she was conscious only of
her trouble, of his ardor, and of their nearness. His address she well
remembered, and she neither paused nor faltered. To say even that she
reflected would be to speak amiss, for her longing and her haste were
one. Between them both, you may believe, it was with a beating heart
that she reached his door. The servant admitted her without visible
surprise (for Nora wore, as she conceived, the air of some needy
parishioner), and ushered her into the little sitting-room which, with
an adjoining chamber, constituted his apartments. As she crossed the
threshold, she perceived, with something of regret and relief, that he
was not alone. He was sitting somewhat stiffly, with folded arms, facing
the window, near which, before an easel, stood a long-haired gentleman
of foreign and artistic aspect, giving the finishing touches to a
portrait in crayons. Hubert was in position for a likeness of his
handsome face. When Nora appeared, his handsome face remained for a
moment a blank; the next it turned most eloquently pale. "Miss Lambert!"
he cried.

There was such a tremor in his voice that Nora felt that, for the
moment, she must have self-possession for both. "I interrupt you," she
said, with excessive deference.

"We are just finishing!" Hubert answered. "It's my portrait, you see.
You must look at it." The artist made way for her before the easel, laid
down his implements, and took up his hat and gloves. She looked
mechanically at the picture, while Hubert accompanied him to the door,
and they talked awhile about another sitting and about a frame which was
to be sent home. The portrait was clever, but superficial; better
looking at once, and worse looking than Hubert, -- elegant, effeminate,
and unreal. An impulse of wonder passed through her mind that she should
happen just then to find him engaged in this odd self-reproduction. It
was a different Hubert that turned and faced her as the door closed
behind his companion, the real Hubert, with a vengeance! He had gained
time; but surprise, admiration, conjecture, a broad hint of dismay,
wrought bright confusion on his brow. Nora had dropped into the chair
vacated by the artist; and as she sat there with clasped hands, she felt
the young man reading the riddle of her shabby dress and her excited
face. For him, too, she was the real Nora. Dismay began to prevail in
his questioning eyes. He advanced, pushed towards her the chair in which
he had been posturing, and, as he seated himself, made a half-movement
to offer his hand; but before she could take it, he had begun to play
with his watch-chain. "Nora," he asked, "what is it?"

What was it, indeed? What was her errand, and in what words could it be
told? An utter weakness had taken possession of her, a sense of having
reached the goal of her journey, the term of her strength. She dropped
her eyes on her shabby skirt, and passed her hand over it with a gesture
of eloquent simplicity. "I've left Roger," she said.

Hubert made no answer, but his silence somehow seemed to fill the room.
He sunk back in his chair, still looking at her with startled eyes. The
fact intimidated him; he was amazed and confused; yet he felt he must
say something, and in his confusion he uttered a gross absurdity: "Ah,
with his consent?"

The sound of his voice was so grateful to her that, at first, she hardly
heeded his words. "I'm alone," she  added, "I'm free." It was after
she had spoken, as she saw him, growing, to his own sense, infinitely
small in the large confidence of her gaze, rise in a perfect agony of
impotence and stand before her, stupidly staring, that she felt he had
neither taken her hand, nor dropped at her feet, nor divinely guessed
her trouble; that, in fact, his very silence was a summons to tell her
story and to justify herself. Her presence there was either a rapture or
a shame. Nora felt as if she had taken a jump, and was learning in
mid-air that the distance was tenfold what she had imagined. It is
strange how the hinging point of great emotions may rest on an instant
of time. These instants, however, seem as ages, viewed from within; and
in such a reverberating moment Nora felt the spiritual substructure of a
passion melting from beneath her feet, crumbling and crashing into the
gulf on whose edge she stood. But her shame at least should be brief.
She rose and bridged this dizzy chasm with some tragic counterfeit of a
smile. "I've come -- I've come -- " she began and faltered. It was a vast
pity some great actress had not been there to note upon the tablets of
her art the light, all-eloquent tremor of tone with which she transposed
her embarrassment into the petition, "Could you lend me a little money?"

Hubert was simply afraid of her. At his freest and bravest, he would
have shrunk from being thus peremptorily brought to the point; and as
matters stood, he felt all the more miserably paralyzed. For him, too,
this was a vital moment. All his falsity, all his levity, all his
egotism and sophism, seemed to crowd upon him and accuse him in
deafening chorus; he seemed, under some glaring blue sky, to stand in
the public stocks for all his pleasant sins. It was with a vast sense of
relief that he heard her ask this simple favor. Money? Would money buy
his release? He took out his purse and grasped a roll of bills; then
suddenly he was overwhelmed by a sense of his cruelty. He flung the
thing on the floor and passed his hands over his face. "Nora, Nora," he
cried, "say it outright; I disappoint you!"

He had become, in the brief space of a moment, the man she once had
loved; but if he was no longer the rose, he stood too near it to be
wantonly bruised. Men and women alike need in some degree to respect
those they have suffered to wrong them. She stooped and picked up the
porte-monnaie, like a beggar-maid in a ballad. "A very little will do,"
she said. "In a day or two I hope to be independent."

"Tell me at least what has happened!" he cried.

She hesitated a moment. "Roger has asked me to be his wife." Hubert's
head swam with the vision of all that this simple statement embodied and
implied. "I refused," Nora added, "and, having refused, I was unwilling
to live any longer on his -- on his -- " Her speech at the last word melted
into silence, and she seemed to fall a-musing. But in an instant she
recovered herself. "I remember your once saying that you would have
liked to see me poor and homeless. Here I am! You ought at least," she
added with a laugh, "to pay for the exhibition!"

Hubert abruptly drew out his watch. "I expect here this moment," he
said, "a young lady of whom you may have heard. She is to come and see
my portrait. I'm engaged to her. I was engaged to her five months ago.
She's rich, pretty, charming. Say but a single word, that you don't
despise me, that you forgive me, and I'll give her up, now, here,
forever, and be anything you'll take me for, -- your husband, your friend,
your slave!" To have been able to make this speech gave Hubert immense
relief. He felt almost himself again.

Nora fixed her eyes on him, with a kind of unfathomable gentleness.
"You're engaged, you were engaged? How strangely you talk about giving
up! Give her my compliments!" It seemed, however, that Nora was to have
the chance of offering them personally, The door was thrown open
and admitted  two ladies whom Nora vaguely remembered to have seen.
In a moment she recognized them as the persons whom, on the evening she
had gone to hear Hubert preach, he had left her, after the sermon, to
conduct to their carriage. The younger one was decidedly pretty, in
spite of a nose a trifle too aquiline. A pair of imperious dark eyes, as
bright as the diamond which glittered in each of her ears, and a nervous
capricious rapidity of motion and gesture, gave her an air of girlish
brusquerie, which was by no means without charm. Her mother's aspect,
however, testified to its being as well to enjoy this charm at a
distance. She was a stout, coarse-featured, good-natured woman, with a
jaded, submissive expression, and seemed to proclaim by a certain bulky
languor, as she followed in her daughter's wake, the subserviency of
matter to mind. Both ladies were dressed to the utmost limits of the
occasion, and savored potently of New York. They came into the room
staring frankly at Nora, and overlooking Hubert with gracious
implication of his being already one of the family. The situation was a
trying one, but he faced it as he might.

"This is Miss Lambert," he said, gravely; and then with an effort to
conjure away confusion with a jest, waving his hand toward his portrait,
"This is the Rev. Hubert Lawrence!"

The elder lady moved toward the picture, but the other came straight to
Nora. "I've seen you before!" she cried defiantly, and with defiance in
her fine eyes. "And I've heard of you too! Yes, you're certainly very
handsome. But pray, what are you doing here?"

"My dear child!" said Hubert, imploringly, and with a burning
side-glance at Nora. If he had been in the pillory before, it was not
till now that the rain of missiles had begun.

"My dear Hubert," said the young lady, "what is she doing here? I have a
right to know. Have you come running after him even here? You're a
wicked girl. You've done me a wrong. You've tried to turn him away from
me. You kept him in Boston for weeks, when he ought to have been here;
when I was writing to him day after day to come. I heard all about it! I
don't know what's the matter with you. I thought you were so very well
off! You look very poor and unhappy, but I must say what I think!"

"My own darling, be reasonable!" murmured her mother. "Come and look at
this beautiful picture. There's no deceit on that brow!"

Nora smiled charitably. "Don't attack me," she said. "If I ever wronged
you, I was quite unconscious of it, and I beg your pardon now."

"Nora," murmured Hubert, piteously, "spare me!"

"Ah, does he call you Nora?" cried the young lady. "The harm's done,
madam! He'll never be what he was. You've changed, Hubert!" And she
turned passionately on her fiance. "You know you are! You talk to me,
but you think of her. And what is the meaning of this visit? You're both
vastly excited; what have you been talking about?"

"Mr. Lawrence has been telling me about you," said Nora; "how pretty,
how charming, how gentle you are!"

"I'm not gentle!" cried the other. "You're laughing at me! Was it to
talk about my prettiness you came here? Do you go about alone, this way?
I never heard of such a thing. You're shameless! do you know that? But
I'm very glad of it; because once you've done this for him, he'll not
care for you. That's the way with men. And I'm not pretty either, not as
you are! You're pale and tired; you've got a horrid dress and shawl, and
yet you're beautiful! Is that the way I must look to please you?" she
demanded, turning back to Hubert.

Hubert, during this spiteful tirade, had stood looking as dark as
thunder, and at this point he broke out fiercely, "Good God, Amy! hold
your tongue. I command you."

Nora, gathering her shawl together,  gave Hubert a glance. "She
loves you," she said, softly.

Amy stared a moment at this vehement adjuration; then she melted into a
smile and turned in ecstasy to her mother. "Good, good!" she cried.
"That's how I like him. I shall have my husband yet."

Nora left the room; and, in spite of her gesture of earnest deprecation,
Hubert followed her down stairs to the street door. "Where are you
going?" he asked in a whisper. "With whom are you staying?"

"I'm alone," said Nora.

"Alone in this great city? Nora, I will do something for you."

"Hubert," she said, "I never in my life needed help less than at this
moment. Farewell." He fancied for an instant that she was going to offer
him her hand, but she only motioned him to open the door. He did so and
she passed out.

She stood there on the pavement, strangely, almost absurdly, free and
light of spirit. She knew neither whither she should turn nor what she
should do, yet the fears which had haunted her for a whole day and night
had vanished. The sky was blazing blue overhead; the opposite side of
the street was all in sun; she hailed the joyous brightness of the day
with a kind of answering joy. She seemed to be in the secret of the
universe. A nursery-maid came along, pushing a baby in a perambulator.
She stooped and greeted the child, and talked pretty nonsense to it with
a fervor which left the young woman staring. Nurse and child went their
way, and Nora lingered, looking up and down the empty street. Suddenly a
gentleman turned into it from the cross-street above. He was walking
fast; he had his hat in his hand, and with his other hand he was passing
his handkerchief over his forehead. As she stood and watched him draw
near, down the bright vista of the street, there came upon her a
singular and altogether nameless sensation, strangely similar to one she
had felt a couple of years before, when a physician had given her a dose
of ether. The gentleman, she perceived, was Roger; but the short
interval of space and time which separated them seemed to expand into a
throbbing immensity and eternity. She seemed to be watching him for an
age, and, as she did so, to be swinging through the whole circle of
emotion and the full realization of being. Yes, she was in the secret of
the universe, and the secret of the universe was, that Roger was the
only man in it who had a heart. Suddenly she felt a palpable grasp.
Roger stood before her, and had taken her hand. For a moment he said
nothing; but the touch of his hand spoke loud. They stood for an instant
scanning the change in each other's faces. "Where are you going?" said
Roger, at last, imploringly.

Nora read silently in his haggard furrows the whole record of his
passion and grief. It is a strange truth that they seemed the most
beautiful things she had ever looked upon; the sight of them was
delicious. They seemed to whisper louder and louder that secret about
Roger's heart.

Nora collected herself as solemnly as one on a death-bed making a will;
but Roger was still in miserable doubt and dread. "I've followed you,"
he said, "in spite of that request in your letter."

"Have you got my letter?" Nora asked.

"It was the only thing you had left me," he said, and drew it, creased
and crumpled, out of his pocket.

She took it from him and tore it slowly into a dozen pieces, never
taking her eyes off his own. "Don't try and forget that I wrote it," she
said. "My destroying it now means more than that would have meant."

"What does it mean, Nora?" he asked, in hardly audible tones.

"It means that I'm a wiser girl to-day than then. I know myself
better, I know you better. O Roger!" she cried, "it means everything!"

He passed her hand through his arm and held it there against his heart,
 while he stood looking hard at the pavement, as if to steady
himself amid this great convulsion of things. Then raising his head,
"Come," he said; "come!"

But she detained him, laying her other hand on his arm. "No; you must
understand first. If I'm wiser now, I've learnt wisdom at my cost. I'm
not the girl you proposed to on Sunday. I feel -- I feel dishonored!"
she said, uttering the word with a vehemence which stirred his soul to
its depths.

"My own poor child!" he murmured, staring.

"There's a young girl in that house," Nora went on, "who will tell you
that I'm shameless!"

"What house? what young girl?"

"I don't know her name. Hubert is engaged to her."

Roger gave a glance at the house behind them, as if to fling defiance
and oblivion upon all that it suggested and contained. Then turning to
Nora with a smile of consummate tenderness: "My dear Nora, what have we
to do with Hubert's young girls?"

Roger, the reader will admit, was on a level with the occasion, -- as with
every other occasion which subsequently presented itself.

Mrs. Keith and Mrs. Lawrence are very good friends. On being
complimented on possessing the confidence of so charming a woman as Mrs.
Lawrence, Mrs. Keith has been known to say, opening and shutting her
fan, "The fact is, Nora is under a very peculiar obligation to me."
Another of Mrs. Keith's sayings may perhaps be appositely retailed, -- her
answer, one evening, to an inquiry as to Roger's age:
"Twenty-five -- seconde jeunesse." Hubert Lawrence, on the other hand,
has already begun to pass for an elderly man. Mrs. Hubert, however,
preserves the balance. She is wonderfully fresh, and, with time, has
grown stout, like her mother, though she has nothing of the jaded look
of that excellent lady.

