Three times within a quarter of an hour -- shifting the while his
posture on his chair of contemplation -- had he looked at his watch as
for its final sharp hint that he should decide, that he should get up.
His seat was one of a group fairly sequestered, unoccupied save for his
own presence, and from where he lingered he looked off at a stretch of
lawn freshened by recent April showers and on which sundry small
children were at play. The trees, the shrubs, the plants, every stem and
twig just ruffled as by the first touch of the light finger of the
relenting year, struck him as standing still in the blest hope of more
of the same caress; the quarter about him held its breath after the
fashion of the child who waits with the rigour of an open mouth and shut
eyes for the promised sensible effect of his having been good. So, in
the windless, sun-warmed air of the beautiful afternoon, the Park of the
winter's end had struck White-Mason as waiting; even New York, under
such an impression, was 'good', good enough -- for _him_: its very
sounds were faint, were almost sweet, as they reached him from so
seemingly far beyond the wooded horizon that formed the [186] remoter
limit of his large shallow glade. The tones of the frolic infants ceased
to be nondescript and harsh, were in fact almost as fresh and decent as
the frilled and puckered and ribboned garb of the little girls, which
had always a way, in those parts, of so portentously flaunting the
daughters of the strange native -- that is of the overwhelmingly alien
-- populace at him.
  Not that these things in particular were his matter of meditation now;
he had wanted, at the end of his walk, to sit apart a little and think
-- and had been doing that for twenty minutes, even though as yet to no
break in the charm of procrastination. But he had looked without seeing
and listened without hearing: all that had been positive for him was
that he hadn't failed vaguely to feel. He had felt in the first place,
and he continued to feel -- yes, at forty-eight quite as much as at any
point of the supposed reign of younger intensities -- the great spirit
of the air, the fine sense of the season, the supreme appeal of Nature,
he might have said, to his time of life; quite as if she, easy,
indulgent, indifferent, cynical Power, were offering him the last chance
it would rest with his wit or his blood to embrace. Then with that he
had been entertaining, to the point and with the prolonged consequence
of accepted immobilization, the certitude that if he did call on Mrs
Worthingham and find her at home he couldn't in justice to himself not
put to her the question that had lapsed the other time, the last time,
through the irritating [187] and persistent, even if accidental,
presence of others. What friends she had -- the people who so stupidly,
so wantonly stuck! If they _should_, he and she, come to an
understanding, that would presumably have to include certain members of
her singularly ill-composed circle, in whom it was incredible to him
that he should ever take an interest. This defeat, to do himself justice
-- he had bent rather predominantly on _that_, you see; ideal justice to
_her_, with her possible conception of what it should consist of being
another and quite a different matter -- he had had the fact of the
Sunday afternoon to thank for; she didn't 'keep' that day for him, since
they hadn't, up to now, quite begun to cultivate the appointment or
assignation founded on explicit sacrifices. He might at any rate look to
find this pleasant practical Wednesday -- should he indeed, at his
actual rate, stay it before it ebbed -- more liberally and intendingly
given him.
  The sound he at last most wittingly distinguished in his nook was the
single deep note of half-past five borne to him from some high-perched
public clock. He finally got up with the sense that the time from then
on _ought_ at least to be felt as sacred to him. At this juncture it was
-- while he stood there shaking his garments, settling his hat, his
necktie, his shirt-cuffs, fixing the high polish of his fine shoes as if
for some reflection in it of his straight and spare and grizzled, his
refined and trimmed and dressed, his altogether distinguished person,
that of a gentleman [188] abundantly settled, but of a bachelor markedly
nervous -- at this crisis it was, doubtless, that he at once most
measured and least resented his predicament. If he should go he would
almost to a certainty find her, and if he should find her he would
almost to a certainty come to the point. He wouldn't put it off again --
there was that high consideration for him of justice at least to
himself. He had never yet denied himself anything so apparently fraught
with possibilities as the idea of proposing to Mrs Worthingham -- never
yet, in other words, denied himself anything he had so distinctly wanted
to do; and the results of that wisdom had remained for him precisely the
precious parts of experience. Counting only the offers of his honourable
hand, these had been on three remembered occasions at least the
consequence of an impulse as sharp and a self-respect that hadn't in the
least suffered, moreover, from the failure of each appeal. He had been
met in the three cases -- the only ones he at all compared with his
present case -- by the frank confession that he didn't somehow, charming
as he was, cause himself to be superstitiously believed in; and the
lapse of life, afterward, had cleared up many doubts.
  It _wouldn't_ have done, he eventually, he lucidly saw, each time he
had been refused; and the candour of his nature was such that he could
live to think of these very passages as a proof of how right he had been
-- right, that is, to have put himself forward always, by the happiest
instinct, only in impossible [189] conditions. He had the happy
consciousness of having exposed the important question to the crucial
test, and of having escaped, by that persistent logic, a grave mistake.
What better proof of his escape than the fact that he was now free to
renew the all-interesting inquiry, and should be exactly about to do so
in different and better conditions? The conditions were better by as
much more -- as much more of his career and character, of his situation,
his reputation he could even have called it, of his knowledge of life,
of his somewhat extended means, of his possibly augmented charm, of his
certainly improved mind and temper -- as was involved in the actual
impending settlement. Once he had got into motion, once he had crossed
the Park and passed out of it, entering, with very little space to
traverse, one of the short new streets that abutted on its east side,
his step became that of a man young enough to find confidence, quite to
find felicity, in the sense, in almost any sense, of action. He could
still enjoy almost anything, absolutely an unpleasant thing, in default
of a better, that might still remind him he wasn't so old. The standing
newness of everything about him would, it was true, have weakened this
cheer by too much presuming on it; Mrs Worthingham's house, before which
he stopped, had that gloss of new money, that glare of a piece fresh
from the mint and ringing for the first time on any counter, which seems
to claim for it, in any transaction, something more than the 'face'
value. [190]
  This could but be yet more the case for the impression of the observer
introduced and committed. On our friend's part I mean, after his
admission and while still in the hall, the sense of the general shining
immediacy, of the still unhushed clamour of the shock, was perhaps
stronger than he had ever known it. That broke out from every corner as
the high pitch of interest, and with a candour that -- no, certainly --
he had never seen equalled; every particular expensive object shrieking
at him in its artless pride that it had just 'come home'. He met the
whole vision with something of the grimace produced on persons without
goggles by the passage from a shelter to a blinding light; and if he had
-- by a perfectly possible chance -- been 'snap-shotted' on the spot,
would have struck you as showing for his first tribute to the temple of
Mrs Worthingham's charming presence a scowl almost of anguish. He wasn't
constitutionally, it may at once be explained for him, a goggled person;
and he was condemned in New York to this frequent violence of transition
-- having to reckon with it whenever he went out, as who should say,
from himself. The high pitch of interest, to his taste, was the pitch of
history, the pitch of acquired and earned suggestion, the pitch of
association, in a word; so that he lived by preference, incontestably,
if not in a rich gloom, which would have been beyond his means and
spirits, at least amid objects and images that confessed to the tone of
time. [191]
  He had ever felt that an indispensable presence -- with a need of it
moreover that interfered at no point with his gentle habit, not to say
his subtle art, of drawing out what was left him of his youth, of thinly
and thriftily spreading the rest of that choicest jam-pot of the
cupboard of consciousness over the remainder of a slice of life still
possibly thick enough to bear it; or in other words of moving the
melancholy limits, the significant signs, constantly a little further
on, very much as property-marks or staked boundaries are sometimes
stealthily shifted at night. He positively cherished in fact, as against
the too inveterate gesture of distressfully guarding his eyeballs -- so
many New York aspects seemed to keep him at it -- an ideal of adjusted
appreciation, of courageous curiosity, of fairly letting the world about
him, a world of constant breathless renewals and merciless
substitutions, make its flaring assault on its own inordinate terms.
Newness _was_ value in the piece -- for the acquisitor, or at least
sometimes might be, even though the act of 'blowing' hard, the act
marking a heated freshness of arrival, or other form of irruption, could
never minister to the peace of those already and long on the field; and
this if only because maturer tone was after all most appreciable and
most consoling when one staggered back to it, wounded, bleeding,
blinded, from the riot of the raw -- or, to put the whole experience
more prettily, no doubt, from excesses of light.

[192]
                          -=-=-  2  -=-=-

  If he went in, however, with something of his more or less inevitable
scowl, there were really, at the moment, two rather valid reasons for
screened observation; the first of these being that the whole place
seemed to reflect as never before the lustre of Mrs Worthingham's own
polished and prosperous little person -- to smile, it struck him, with
her smile, to twinkle not only with the gleam of her lovely teeth, but
with that of all her rings and brooches and bangles and other gewgaws,
to curl and spasmodically cluster as in emulation of her charming
complicated yellow tresses, to surround the most animated of
pink-and-white, of ruffled and ribboned, of frilled and festooned
Dresden china shepherdesses with exactly the right system of rococo
curves and convolutions and other flourishes, a perfect bower of painted
and gilded and moulded conceits. The second ground of this immediate
impression of scenic extravagance, almost as if the curtain rose for him
to the first act of some small and expensively mounted comic opera, was
that she hadn't, after all, awaited him in fond singleness, but had
again just a trifle inconsiderately exposed him to the drawback of
having to reckon, for whatever design he might amiably entertain, with
the presence of a third and quite superfluous person, a small black
insignificant but none the less oppressive stranger. It was odd [193]
how, on the instant, the little lady engaged with her did affect him as
comparatively black -- very much as if that had absolutely, in such a
medium, to be the graceless appearance of any item not positively of
some fresh shade of a light colour or of some pretty pretension to a
charming twist. Any witness of their meeting, his hostess should surely
have felt, would have been a false note in the whole rosy glow; but what
note so false as that of the dingy little presence that she might
actually, by a refinement of her perhaps always too visible study of
effect, have provided as a positive contrast or foil? whose name and
intervention, moreover, she appeared to be no more moved to mention and
account for than she might have been to 'present' -- whether as
stretched at her feet or erect upon disciplined haunches -- some shaggy
old domesticated terrier or poodle.
  Extraordinarily, after he had been in the room five minutes -- a space
of time during which his fellow-visitor had neither budged nor uttered a
sound -- he had made Mrs Worthingham out as all at once perfectly
pleased to see him, completely aware of what he had most in mind, and
singularly serene in face of his sense of their impediment. It was as if
for all the world she didn't take it for one, the immobility, to say
nothing of the seeming equanimity, of their tactless companion; at whom
meanwhile indeed our friend himself, after his first ruffled perception,
no more adventured a look than if advised by his [194] constitutional
kindness that to notice her in any degree would perforce be ungraciously
to glower. He talked after a fashion with the woman as to whose power to
please and amuse and serve him, as to whose really quite organized and
indicated fitness for lighting up his autumn afternoon of life his
conviction had lately strained itself so clear; but he was all the while
carrying on an intenser exchange with his own spirit and trying to read
into the charming creature's behaviour, as he could only call it, some
confirmation of his theory that she also had her inward flutter and
anxiously counted on him. He found support, happily for the conviction
just named, in the idea, at no moment as yet really repugnant to him,
the idea bound up in fact with the finer essence of her appeal, that she
had her own vision too of her quality and her price, and that the last
appearance she would have liked to bristle with was that of being
forewarned and eager.
  He had, if he came to think of it, scarce definitely warned her, and
he probably wouldn't have taken to her so consciously in the first
instance without an appreciative sense that, as she was a little person
of twenty superficial graces, so she was also a little person with her
secret pride. She might just have planted her mangy lion -- not to say
her muzzled house-dog -- there in his path as a symbol that she wasn't
cheap and easy; which would be a thing he couldn't possibly wish his
future wife to have shown herself in advance, even if to him alone. That
she [195] could make him put himself such questions was precisely part
of the attaching play of her iridescent surface, the shimmering
interfusion of her various aspects; that of her youth with her
independence -- her pecuniary perhaps in particular, that of her
vivacity with her beauty, that of her facility above all with her odd
novelty; the high modernity, as people appeared to have come to call it,
that made her so much more 'knowing' in some directions than even he,
man of the world as he certainly was, could pretend to be, though all on
a basis of the most unconscious and instinctive and luxurious
assumption. She was 'up' to everything, aware of everything -- if one
counted from a short enough time back (from week before last, say, and
as if quantities of history had burst upon the world within the
fortnight); she was likewise surprised at nothing, and in that direction
one might reckon as far ahead as the rest of her lifetime, or at any
rate as the rest of his, which was all that would concern him: it was as
if the suitability of the future to her personal and rather pampered
tastes was what she most took for granted, so that he could see her, for
all her Dresden-china shoes and her flutter of wondrous befrilled
contemporary skirts, skip by the side of the coming age as over the
floor of a ball-room, keeping step with its monstrous stride and
prepared for every figure of the dance.
  Her outlook took form to him suddenly as a great square sunny window
that hung in assured fashion [196] over the immensity of life. There
rose toward it as from a vast swarming _plaza_ a high tide of motion and
sound; yet it was at the same time as if even while he looked her light
gemmed hand, flashing on him in addition to those other things the
perfect polish of the prettiest pink finger-nails in the world, had
touched a spring, the most ingenious of recent devices for instant ease,
which dropped half across the scene a soft-coloured mechanical blind, a
fluttered fringed awning of charmingly toned silk, such as would make a
bath of cool shade for the favoured friend leaning with her there --
that is for the happy couple itself -- on the balcony. The great view
would be the prospect and privilege of the very state he coveted --
since didn't he covet it? -- the state of being so securely at her side;
while the wash of privacy, as one might count it, the broad fine brush
dipped into clear umber and passed, full and wet, straight across the
strong scheme of colour, would represent the security itself, all the
uplifted inner elegance, the condition, so ideal, of being shut out from
nothing and yet of having, so gaily and breezily aloft, none of the
burden or worry of anything. Thus, as I say, for our friend, the place
itself, while his vivid impression lasted, portentously opened and
spread, and what was before him took, to his vision, though indeed at so
other a crisis, the form of the 'glimmering square' of the poet; yet,
for a still more remarkable fact, with an incongruous object usurping at
a given instant the privilege of [197] the frame and seeming, even as he
looked, to block the view.
  The incongruous object was a woman's head, crowned with a little
sparsely feathered black hat, an ornament quite unlike those the women
mostly noticed by White-Mason were now 'wearing', and that grew and
grew, that came nearer and nearer, while it met his eyes, after the
manner of images in the cinematograph. It had presently loomed so large
that he saw nothing else -- not only among the things at a considerable
distance, the things Mrs Worthingham would eventually, yet unmistakably,
introduce him to, but among those of this lady's various attributes and
appurtenances as to which he had been in the very act of cultivating his
consciousness. It was in the course of another minute the most
extraordinary thing in the world: everything had altered, dropped,
darkened, disappeared; his imagination had spread its wings only to feel
them flop all grotesquely at its sides as he recognized in his hostess's
quiet companion, the oppressive alien who hadn't indeed interfered with
his fanciful flight, though she had prevented his immediate declaration
and brought about the thud, not to say the felt violent shock, of his
fall to earth, the perfectly plain identity of Cornelia Rasch. It was
she who had remained there at attention; it was she their companion
hadn't introduced; it was she he had forborne to face with his fear of
incivility. He stared at her -- everything else went. [198]
  "Why, it has been _you_ all this time?"
  Miss Rasch fairly turned pale. "I was waiting to see if you'd know
me."
  "Ah, my dear Cornelia" -- he came straight out with it -- "rather!"
  "Well, it isn't," she returned with a quick change to red now, "from
having taken much time to look at me!"
  She smiled, she even laughed, but he could see how she had felt his
unconsciousness, poor thing; the acquaintance, quite the friend of his
youth, as she had been, the associate of his childhood, of his early
manhood, of his middle age in fact, up to a few years back, not more
than ten at the most; the associate too of so many of his associates and
of almost all of his relations, those of the other time, those who had
mainly gone for ever; the person in short whose noted disappearance,
though it might have seemed final, had been only of recent seasons. She
was present again now, all unexpectedly -- he had heard of her having at
last, left alone after successive deaths and with scant resources,
sought economic salvation in Europe, the promised land of American
thrift -- she was present as this almost ancient and this oddly
unassertive little rotund figure whom one seemed no more obliged to
address than if she had been a black satin ottoman 'treated' with
buttons and gimp; a class of object as to which the policy of blindness
was imperative. He felt the need of some explanatory plea, and before he
could think had uttered one [199] at Mrs Worthingham's expense. "Why,
you see we weren't introduced!"
  "No -- but I didn't suppose I should have to be named to you."
  "Well, my dear woman, you haven't -- do me that justice!" He could at
least make this point. "I felt all the while---!" However it would have
taken him long to say what he had been feeling; and he was aware now of
the pretty projected light of Mrs Worthingham's wonder. She looked as
if, out for a walk with her, he had put her to the inconvenience of his
stopping to speak to a strange woman in the street.
  "I never supposed you knew her!" -- it was to him his hostess excused
herself.
  This made Miss Rasch spring up, distinctly flushed, distinctly strange
to behold, but not vulgarly nettled -- Cornelia was incapable of that;
only rather funnily bridling and laughing, only showing that this was
all she had waited for, only saying just the right thing, the thing she
could make so clearly a jest. "Of course if you _had_ you'd have
presented him."
  Mrs Worthingham looked while answering at White-Mason. "I didn't want
you to go -- which you see you do as soon as he speaks to you. But I
never dreamed---!"
  "That there was anything between us? Ah, there are no end of things!"
He, on his side, though addressing the younger and prettier woman,
looked at his fellow-guest; to whom he even continued: [200] "When did
you get back? May I come and see you the very first thing?"
  Cornelia gasped and wriggled -- she practically giggled; she had lost
every atom of her little old, her little young, though always
unaccountable, prettiness, which used to peep so, on the bare chance of
a shot, from behind indefensible features, that it almost made watching
her a form of sport. He had heard vaguely of her, it came back to him
(for there had been no letters; their later acquaintance, thank
goodness, hadn't involved that), as experimenting, for economy, and then
as settling, to the same rather dismal end, somewhere in England, at one
of those intensely English places, St Leonards, Cheltenham, Bognor,
Dawlish -- which, awfully, _was_ it? -- and she now affected him for all
the world as some small, squirming, exclaiming, genteelly conversing old
maid of a type vaguely associated with the three-volume novels he used
to feed on (besides his so often encountering it in 'real life') during
a far-away stay of his own at Brighton. Odder than any element of his
ex-gossip's identity itself, however, was the fact that she somehow,
with it all, rejoiced his sight. Indeed the supreme oddity was that the
manner of her reply to his request for leave to call should have
absolutely charmed his attention. She didn't look at him; she only, from
under her frumpy, crapy, curiously exotic hat, and with her good little
near-sighted insinuating glare, expressed to Mrs Worthingham, while she
answered him, wonderful [201] arch things, the overdone things of a shy
woman. "Yes, you may call -- but only when this dear lovely lady has
done with you!" The moment after which she had gone. 


                          -=-=-  3  -=-=-

  Forty minutes later he was taking his way back from the queer
miscarriage of his adventure; taking it, with no conscious positive
felicity, through the very spaces that had witnessed shortly before the
considerable serenity of his assurance. He had said to himself then, or
had as good as said it, that, since he might do perfectly as he liked,
it couldn't fail for him that he must soon retrace those steps, humming,
to all intents, the first bars of a wedding march; so beautifully had it
cleared up that he was 'going to like' letting Mrs Worthingham accept
him. He was to have hummed no wedding-march, as it seemed to be turning
out -- he had none, up to now, to hum; and yet, extraordinarily, it
wasn't in the least because she had refused him. Why then hadn't he
liked as much as he had intended to like it putting the pleasant act,
the act of not refusing him, in her power? Could it all have come from
the awkward minute of his failure to decide sharply, on Cornelia's
departure, whether or no he would attend her to the door? He hadn't
decided at all -- what the deuce had been in him? -- but had danced to
and fro in the room, thinking better of each impulse and then thinking
worse. [202] He had hesitated like an ass erect on absurd hind legs
between two bundles of hay; the upshot of which must have been his
giving the falsest impression. In what way that was to be for an instant
considered had their common past committed him to crazy Cornelia? He
repudiated with a whack on the gravel any ghost of an obligation.
  What he could get rid of with scanter success, unfortunately, was the
peculiar sharpness of his sense that, though mystified by his visible
flurry -- and yet not mystified enough for a sympathetic question either
-- his hostess had been, on the whole, even more frankly diverted: which
was precisely an example of that newest, freshest, finest freedom in
her, the air and the candour of assuming, not 'heartlessly', not
viciously, not even very consciously, but with a bright pampered
confidence which would probably end by affecting one's nerves as the
most impertinent stroke in the world, that every blest thing coming up
for her in any connection was somehow matter for her general recreation.
There she was again with the innocent egotism, the gilded and
overflowing anarchism, really, of her doubtless quite unwitting but none
the less rabid modern note. Her grace of ease was perfect, but it was
all grace of ease, not a single shred of it grace of uncertainty or of
difficulty -- which meant, when you came to see, that, for its happy
working, not a grain of provision was left by it to mere manners. This
was clearly going to be the music of the future -- that if [203] people
were but rich enough and furnished enough and fed enough, exercised and
sanitated and manicured, and generally advised and advertised and made
'knowing' enough, _avertis_ enough, as the term appeared to be nowadays
in Paris, all they had to do for civility was to take the amused ironic
view of those who might be less initiated. In _his_ time, when he was
young or even when he was only but a little less middle-aged, the best
manners had been the best kindness, and the best kindness had mostly
been some art of not insisting on one's luxurious differences, of
concealing rather, for common humanity, if not for common decency, a
part at least of the intensity or the ferocity with which one might be
'in the know'.
  Oh, the 'know' -- Mrs Worthingham was in it, all instinctively,
inevitably and as a matter of course, up to her eyes; which didn't,
however, the least little bit prevent her being as ignorant as a fish of
everything that really and intimately and fundamentally concerned _him_,
poor dear old White-Mason. She didn't, in the first place, so much as
know who he was -- by which he meant know who and what it was to _be_ a
White-Mason, even a poor and a dear and old one, 'anyway'. That indeed
-- he did her perfect justice -- was of the very essence of the newness
and freshness and beautiful, brave social irresponsibility by which she
had originally dazzled him: just exactly that circumstance of her having
no instinct for any old quality or quantity or identity, [204] a single
historic or social value, as he might say, of the New York of his
already almost legendary past; and that additional one of his, on his
side, having, so far as this went, cultivated blankness, cultivated
positive prudence, as to her own personal background -- the vagueness,
at the best, with which all honest gentlefolk, the New Yorkers of his
approved stock and conservative generation, were content, as for the
most part they were indubitably wise, to surround the origins and
antecedents and queer unimaginable early influences of persons swimming
into their ken from those parts of the country that quite necessarily
and naturally figured to their view as 'God-forsaken' and generally
impossible.
  The few scattered surviving representatives of a society once 'good'
-- _rari nantes in gurgite vasto_ -- were liable, at the pass things had
come to, to meet, and even amid old shades once sacred, or what was left
of such, every form of social impossibility, and, more irresistibly
still, to find these apparitions often carry themselves (often at least
in the case of the women) with a wondrous wild gallantry, equally
imperturbable and inimitable, the sort of thing that reached its maximum
in Mrs Worthingham. Beyond that who ever wanted to look up their annals,
to reconstruct their steps and stages, to dot their i's in fine, or to
'go behind' anything that was theirs? One wouldn't do that for the world
-- a rudimentary discretion forbade it; and yet this check from
elementary undiscussable taste quite consorted with a [205] due respect
for them, or at any rate with a due respect for oneself in connection
with them; as was just exemplified in what would be his own, what would
be poor dear old White-Mason's, insurmountable aversion to having, on
any pretext, the doubtless very queer spectre of the late Mr Worthingham
presented to him. No question had he asked, or would he ever ask, should
his life -- that is should the success of his courtship -- even
intimately depend on it, either about that obscure agent of his
mistress's actual affluence or about the happy head-spring itself, and
the apparently copious tributaries, of the golden stream.
  From all which marked anomalies, at any rate, what was the moral to
draw? He dropped into a Park chair again with that question, he lost
himself in the wonder of why he had come away with his homage so very
much unpaid. Yet it didn't seem at all, actually, as if he could say or
conclude, as if he could do anything but keep on worrying -- just in
conformity with his being a person who, whether or no familiar with the
need to make his conduct square with his conscience and his taste was
never wholly exempt from that of making his taste and his conscience
square with his conduct. To this latter occupation he further abandoned
himself, and it didn't release him from his second brooding session till
the sweet spring sunset had begun to gather and he had more or less
cleared up, in the deepening dusk, the effective relation between the
various parts of [206] his ridiculously agitating experience. There were
vital facts he seemed thus to catch, to seize, with a nervous hand, and
the twilight helping, by their vaguely-whisked tails; unquiet truths
that swarmed out after the fashion of creatures bold only at eventide,
creatures that hovered and circled, that verily brushed his nose, in
spite of their shyness. Yes, he had practically just sat on with his
'mistress' -- heaven save the mark! -- as if _not_ to come to the point;
as if it had absolutely come up that there would be something rather
vulgar and awful in doing so. The whole stretch of his stay after
Cornelia's withdrawal had been consumed by his almost ostentatiously
treating himself to the opportunity of which he was to make nothing. It
was as if he had sat and watched himself -- that came back to him: Shall
I now or shan't I? Will I now or won't I? Say within the next three
minutes, say by a quarter past six, or by twenty minutes past, at the
furthest -- always if nothing more comes up to prevent.
  What had already come up to prevent was, in the strangest and
drollest, or at least in the most preposterous, way in the world, that
not Cornelia's presence, but her very absence, with its distraction of
his thoughts, the thoughts that lumbered after her, had made the
difference; and without his being the least able to tell why and how. He
put it to himself after a fashion by the image that, this distraction
once created, his working round to his [207] hostess again, his
reverting to the matter of his errand, began suddenly to represent a
return from so far. That was simply all -- or rather a little less than
all; for something else had contributed. "I never dreamed you knew her,"
and "I never dreamed _you_ did," was inevitably what had been exchanged
between them -- supplemented by Mrs Worthingham's mere scrap of an
explanation: "Oh, yes -- to the small extent you see. Two years ago in
Switzerland when I was at a high place for an 'aftercure', during twenty
days of incessant rain, she was the only person in an hotel of roaring,
gorging, smoking Germans with whom I couldn't have a word of talk. She
and I were the only speakers of English, and were thrown together like
castaways on a desert island and in a raging storm. She was ill besides,
and she had no maid, and mine looked after her, and she was very
grateful -- writing to me later on and saying she should certainly come
to see me if she ever returned to New York. She _has_ returned, you see
-- and there she was, poor little creature!" Such was Mrs Worthingham's
tribute -- to which even his asking her if Miss Rasch had ever happened
to speak of him caused her practically to add nothing. Visibly she had
never thought again of anyone Miss Rasch had spoken of or anything Miss
Rasch had said; right as she was, naturally, about her being a little
clever queer creature. This was perfectly true, and yet it was probably
-- by being _all_ she could dream of about her -- what had paralysed his
proper gallantry. [208] Its effect had been not in what it simply
stated, but in what, under his secretly disintegrating criticism, it
almost luridly symbolized.
  He had quitted his seat in the Louis Quinze drawing-room without
having, as he would have described it, done anything but give the lady
of the scene a superior chance not to betray a defeated hope -- not,
that is, to fail of the famous 'pride' mostly supposed to prop even the
most infatuated women at such junctures; by which chance, to do her
justice, she had thoroughly seemed to profit. But he finally rose from
his later station with a feeling of better success. He had by a happy
turn of his hand got hold of the most precious, the least obscure of the
flitting, circling things that brushed his ears. What he wanted -- as
justifying for him a little further consideration -- was there before
him from the moment he could put it that Mrs Worthingham had no data. He
almost hugged that word -- it suddenly came to mean so much to him. No
data, he felt, for a conception of the sort of thing the New York of
'his time' had been in his personal life -- the New York so
unexpectedly, so vividly, and, as he might say, so perversely called
back to all his senses by its identity with that of poor Cornelia's
time: since even she had had a time, small show as it was likely to make
now, and his time and hers had been the same. Cornelia figured to him
while he walked away as by contrast and opposition a massive little
bundle of data; his impatience to go to see her [209] sharpened as he
thought of this: so certainly should he find out that wherever he might
touch her, with a gentle though firm pressure, he would, as the fond
visitor of old houses taps and fingers a disfeatured, overpapered wall
with the conviction of a wainscot-edge beneath, recognize some small
extrusion of history. 


                          -=-=-  4  -=-=-

  There would have been a wonder for us meanwhile in his continued use,
as it were, of his happy formula -- brought out to Cornelia Rasch within
ten minutes, or perhaps only within twenty, of his having settled into
the quite comfortable chair that, two days later, she indicated to him
by her fireside. He had arrived at her address through the fortunate
chance of his having noticed her card, as he went out, deposited, in the
good old New York fashion, on one of the rococo tables of Mrs
Worthingham's hall. His eye had been caught by the pencilled indication
that was to affect him, the next instant, as fairly placed there for his
sake. This had really been his luck, for he shouldn't have liked to
write to Mrs Worthingham for guidance -- _that_ he felt, though too
impatient just now to analyze the reluctance. There was nobody else he
could have approached for a clue, and with this reflection he was
already aware of how it testified to their rare little position, his and
Cornelia's -- position as conscious, ironic, pathetic survivors together
[210] of a dead and buried society -- that there would have been, in all
the town, under such stress, not a member of their old circle left to
turn to. Mrs Worthingham had practically, even if accidentally, helped
him to knowledge; the last nail in the coffin of the poor dear extinct
past had been planted for him by his having thus to reach his antique
contemporary through perforation of the newest newness. The note of this
particular recognition was in fact the more prescribed to him that the
ground of Cornelia's return to a scene swept so bare of the
associational charm was certainly inconspicuous. What had she then come
back for? -- he had asked himself that; with the effect of deciding that
it probably would have been, a little, to 'look after' her remnant of
property. Perhaps she had come to save what little might still remain of
that shrivelled interest; perhaps she had been, by those who took care
of it for her, further swindled and despoiled, so that she wished to get
at the facts. Perhaps on the other hand -- it was a more cheerful chance
-- her investments, decently administered, were making larger returns,
so that the rigorous thrift of Bognor could be finally relaxed.
  He had little to learn about the attraction of Europe, and rather
expected that in the event of his union with Mrs Worthingham he should
find himself pleading for it with the competence of one more in the
'know' about Paris and Rome, about Venice and Florence, than even she
could be. He could have lived on in _his_ New York, that is in the
sentimental, [211] the spiritual, the more or less romantic visitation
of it; but had it been positive for him that he could live on in hers?
-- unless indeed the possibility of this had been just (like the famous
_vertige de l'ab^ime_, like the solicitation of danger, or otherwise of
the dreadful) the very hinge of his whole dream. However that might be,
his curiosity was occupied rather with the conceivable hinge of poor
Cornelia's: it was perhaps thinkable that even Mrs Worthingham's New
York, once it should have become possible again at all, might have put
forth to this lone exile a plea that wouldn't be in the chords of
Bognor. For himself, after all, too, the attraction had been much more
of the Europe over which one might move at one's ease, and which
therefore could but cost, and cost much, right and left, than of the
Europe adapted to scrimping. He saw himself on the whole scrimping with
more zest even in Mrs Worthingham's New York than under the inspiration
of Bognor. Apart from which it was yet again odd, not to say perceptibly
pleasing to him, to note where the emphasis of his interest fell in this
fumble of fancy over such felt oppositions as the new, the latest, the
luridest power of money and the ancient reserves and moderations and
mediocrities. These last struck him as showing by contrast the old brown
surface and tone as of velvet rubbed and worn, shabby, and even a bit
dingy, but all soft and subtle and still velvety -- which meant still
dignified; whereas the angular facts of current finance were as [212]
harsh and metallic and bewildering as some stacked 'exhibit' of ugly
patented inventions, things his mediaeval mind forbade his taking in. He
had, for instance, the sense of knowing the pleasant little old Rasch
fortune -- pleasant as far as it went; blurred memories and impressions
of what it had been and what it hadn't, of how it had grown and how
languished and how melted; they came back to him and put on such
vividness that he could almost have figured himself testify for them
before a bland and encouraging Board. The idea of taking the field in
any manner on the subject of Mrs Worthingham's resources would have
affected him on the other hand as an odious ordeal, some glare of
embarrassment and exposure in a circle of hard unhelpful attention, of
converging, derisive, unsuggestive eyes.
  In Cornelia's small and quite cynically modern flat -- the house had a
grotesque name, 'The Gainsborough', but at least wasn't an awful
boarding-house, as he had feared, and she could receive him quite
honourably, which was so much to the good -- he would have been ready to
use at once to her the greatest freedom of friendly allusion: 'Have you
still your old 'family interest' in those two houses in Seventh Avenue?
-- one of which was next to a corner grocery, don't you know? and was
occupied as to its lower part by a candy-shop where the proportion of
the stock of suspectedly stale popcorn to that of rarer and stickier
joys betrayed perhaps a modest capital on the part of your father's,
your [213] grandfather's or whoever's tenant, but out of which I
nevertheless remember once to have come as out of a bath of sweets, with
my very garments, and even the separate hairs of my head, glued
together. The other of the pair, a tobacconist's, further down, had
before it a wonderful huge Indian who thrust out wooden cigars at an
indifferent world -- you could buy candy cigars too at the popcorn shop,
and I greatly preferred them to the wooden; I remember well how I used
to gape in fascination at the Indian and wonder if the last of the
Mohicans was like him; besides admiring so the resources of a family
whose 'property' was in such forms. I haven't been round there lately --
we must go round together; but don't tell me the forms have utterly
perished!' It was after _that_ fashion he might easily have been moved,
and with almost no transition, to break out to Cornelia -- quite as if
taking up some old talk, some old community of gossip, just where they
had left it; even with the consciousness perhaps of overdoing a little,
of putting at its maximum, for the present harmony, recovery, recapture
(what should he call it?) the pitch and quantity of what the past had
held for them.
  He didn't in fact, no doubt, dart straight off to Seventh Avenue,
there being too many other old things and much nearer and long
subsequent; the point was only that for everything they spoke of after
he had fairly begun to lean back and stretch his legs, and after she had
let him, above all, light [214] the first of a succession of cigarettes
-- for everything they spoke of he positively cultivated extravagance
and excess, piling up the crackling twigs as on the very altar of
memory; and that by the end of half an hour she had lent herself, all
gallantly, to their game. It was the game of feeding the beautiful
iridescent flame, ruddy and green and gold, blue and pink and amber and
silver, with anything they could pick up, anything that would burn and
flicker. Thick-strown with such gleanings the occasion seemed indeed, in
spite of the truth that they perhaps wouldn't have proved, under
cross-examination, to have rubbed shoulders in the other life so very
hard. Casual contacts, qualified communities enough, there had doubtless
been, but not particular 'passages', nothing that counted, as he might
think of it, for their 'very own' together, for nobody's else at all.
These shades of historic exactitude didn't signify; the more and the
less that there had been made perfect terms -- and just by his being
there and by her rejoicing in it -- with their present need to have
_had_ all their past could be made to appear to have given them. It was
to this tune they proceeded, the least little bit as if they knowingly
pretended -- he giving her the example and setting her the pace of it,
and she, poor dear, after a first inevitable shyness, an uncertainty of
wonder, a breathlessness of courage, falling into step and going
whatever length he would.
  She showed herself ready for it, grasping gladly at [215] the
perception of what he must mean; and if she didn't immediately and
completely fall in -- not in the first half-hour, not even in the three
or four others that his visit, even whenever he consulted his watch,
still made nothing of -- she yet understood enough as soon as she
understood that, if their finer economy hadn't so beautifully served, he
might have been conveying this, that and the other incoherent and easy
thing by the comparatively clumsy method of sound and statement. 'No, I
never made love to you; it would in fact have been absurd, and I don't
care -- though I almost know, in the sense of almost remembering! -- who
did and who didn't; but you were always about, and so was I, and, little
as you may yourself care who _I_ did it to, I daresay you remember (in
the sense of having known of it!) any old appearances that told. But we
can't afford at this time of day not to help each other to have had --
well, everything there was, since there's no more of it now, nor anyway
of coming by it _except so_; and therefore let us _make_ together, let
us make over and recreate, our lost world; for which we have after all
and at the worst such a lot of material. You were in particular my poor
dear sisters' friend -- they thought you the funniest little brown thing
possible; so isn't that again to the good? You were mine only to the
extent that you were so much in and out of the house -- as how much, if
we come to that, wasn't one in and out, south of Thirtieth Street and
north of Washington Square, in those days, those spacious, [216]
sociable, Arcadian days, that we flattered ourselves we filled with the
modern fever, but that were so different from any of _these_
arrangements of pretended hourly Time that dash themselves forever to
pieces as from the fiftieth floors of sky-scrapers.'
  This was the kind of thing that was in the air, whether he said it or
not, and that could hang there even with such quite other things as more
crudely came out; came in spite of its being perhaps calculated to
strike us that these last would have been rather and most the unspoken
and the indirect. They were Cornelia's contribution, and as soon as she
had begun to talk of Mrs Worthingham -- _he_ didn't begin it! -- they
had taken their place bravely in the centre of the circle. There they
made, the while, their considerable little figure, but all within the
ring formed by fifty other allusions, fitful but really intenser
irruptions that hovered and wavered and came and went, joining hands at
moments and whirling round as in chorus, only then again to dash at the
slightly huddled centre with a free twitch or peck or push or other
taken liberty, after the fashion of irregular frolic motions in a
country dance or a Christmas game.
  "You're so in love with her and want to marry her!" -- she said it all
sympathetically and yearningly, poor crapy Cornelia; as if it were to be
quite taken for granted that she knew all about it. And then when he had
asked how she knew -- why she took so informed a tone about it; all on
the wonder [217] of her seeming so much more 'in' it just at that hour
than he himself quite felt he could figure for: "Ah, how but from the
dear lovely thing herself? Don't you suppose _she_ knows it?"
  "Oh, she absolutely 'knows' it, does she?" -- he fairly heard himself
ask that; and with the oddest sense at once of sharply wanting the
certitude and yet of seeing the question, of hearing himself say the
words, through several thicknesses of some wrong medium. He came back to
it from a distance; as he would have had to come back (this was again
vivid to him) should he have got round again to his ripe intention three
days before -- after his now present but then absent friend, that is,
had left him planted before his now absent but then present one for the
purpose. "Do you mean she -- at all confidently! -- expects?" he went
on, not much minding if it couldn't but sound foolish; the time being
given it for him meanwhile by the sigh, the wondering gasp, all charged
with the unutterable, that the tone of his appeal set in motion. He saw
his companion look at him, but it might have been with the eyes of
thirty years ago; when -- very likely! -- he had put her some such
question about some girl long since dead. Dimly at first, then more
distinctly, didn't it surge back on him for the very strangeness that
there had been some such passage as this between them -- yes, about Mary
Cardew! -- in the autumn of '68?
  "Why, don't you realize your situation?" Miss [218] Rasch struck him
as quite beautifully wailing -- above all to such an effect of deep
interest, that is, on her own part and in him.
  "My situation?" -- he echoed, he considered; but reminded afresh, by
the note of the detached, the far-projected in it, of what he had last
remembered of his sentient state on his once taking ether at the
dentist's.
  "Yours and hers -- the situation of her adoring you. I suppose you at
least know it," Cornelia smiled.
  Yes, it was like the other time and yet it wasn't. _She_ was like --
poor Cornelia was -- everything that used to be; that somehow was most
definite to him. Still he could quite reply, "Do you call it -- her
adoring me -- _my_ situation?"
  "Well, it's a part of yours, surely -- if you're in love with her."
  "Am I, ridiculous old person! in love with her?" White-Mason asked.
  "I may be a ridiculous old person," Cornelia returned -- "and, for
that matter, of course I _am_! But she's young and lovely and rich and
clever: so what could be more natural?"
  "Oh, I was applying that opprobrious epithet---!" He didn't finish,
though he meant he had applied it to himself. He had got up from his
seat; he turned about and, taking in, as his eyes also roamed, several
objects in the room, serene and sturdy, not a bit cheap-looking, little
old New York objects of '68, [219] he made, with an inner art, as if to
recognize them -- made so, that is, for himself; had quite the sense for
the moment of asking them, of imploring them, to recognize _him_, to be
for him things of his own past. Which they truly were, he could have the
next instant cried out; for it meant that if three or four of them,
small sallow carte-de-visite photographs, faithfully framed but
spectrally faded, hadn't in every particular, frames and balloon skirts
and false 'property' balustrades of unimaginable terraces and all, the
tone of time, the secret for warding and easing off the perpetual
imminent ache of one's protective scowl, one would verily but have to
let the scowl stiffen or to take up seriously the question of blue
goggles, during what might remain of life. 


                          -=-=-  5  -=-=-

  What he actually took up from a little old Twelfth-Street table that
piously preserved the plain mahogany circle, with never a curl nor a
crook nor a hint of a brazen flourish, what he paused there a moment for
commerce with, his back presented to crapy Cornelia, who sat taking that
view of him, during this opportunity, very protrusively and frankly and
fondly, was one of the wasted mementoes just mentioned, over which he
both uttered and suppressed a small comprehensive cry. He stood there
another minute to look at it, and when he turned [220] about still kept
it in his hand, only holding it now a little behind him. "You _must_
have come back to stay -- with all your beautiful things. What else does
it mean?"
  "'Beautiful'?" his old friend commented with her brow all wrinkled and
her lips thrust out in expressive dispraise. They might at that rate
have been scarce more beautiful than she herself. "Oh, don't talk so --
after Mrs Worthingham's! _They're_ wonderful, if you will: such things,
such things! But one's own poor relics and odds and ends are one's own
at least; and one _has_ -- yes -- come back to them. They're all I have
in the world to come back to. They were stored, and what I was
paying---!" Miss Rasch woefully added.
  He had possession of the small old picture; he hovered there; he put
his eyes again to it intently; then again held it a little behind him as
if it might have been snatched away or the very feel of it, pressed
against him, was good to his palm. "Mrs Worthingham's things? You think
them beautiful?"
  Cornelia did now, if ever, show an odd face. "Why, certainly,
prodigious, or whatever. Isn't that conceded?"
  "No doubt every horror, at the pass we've come to, is conceded. That's
just what I complain of."
  "Do you _complain_?" -- she drew it out as for surprise: she couldn't
have imagined such a thing.
  "To me her things are awful. They're the newest of the new." [221]
  "Ah, but the old forms!"
  "Those are the most blatant. I mean the swaggering reproductions."
  "Oh, but," she pleaded, "we can't all be _really_ old."
  "No, we can't, Cornelia. But _you_ can---!" said White-Mason with the
frankest appreciation.
  She looked up at him from where she sat as he could imagine her
looking up at the curate at Bognor. "Thank you, sir! If that's all you
want---!"
  "It _is_," he said, "all I want -- or almost."
  "Then no wonder such a creature as that," she lightly moralized,
"won't suit you!"
  He bent upon her, for all the weight of his question, his smoothest
stare. "You hold she certainly won't suit me?"
  "Why, what can I tell about it? Haven't you by this time found out?"
  "No, but I think I'm finding." With which he began again to explore.
  Miss Rasch immensely wondered. "You mean you don't expect to come to
an understanding with her?" And then, as even to this straight challenge
he made at first no answer: "Do you mean you give it up?"
  He waited some instants more, but not meeting her eyes -- only looking
again about the room. "What do you think of my chance?"
  "Oh," his companion cried, "what has what I think to do with it? How
can I think anything but that she must like you?" [222]
  "Yes -- of course. But how much?"
  "Then don't you really know?" Cornelia asked.
  He kept up his walk, oddly preoccupied and still not looking at her.
"Do you, my dear?"
  She waited a little. "If you haven't really put it to her I don't
suppose she knows."
  This at last arrested him again. "My dear Cornelia, she doesn't
know---!"
  He had paused as for the desperate tone, or at least the large
emphasis of it, so that she took him up. "The more reason then to help
her to find it out."
  "I mean," he explained, "that she doesn't know anything."
  "Anything?"
  "Anything else, I mean -- even if she does know _that_."
  Cornelia considered of it. "But what else need she -- in particular --
know? Isn't that the principal thing?"
  "Well" -- and he resumed his circuit -- "she doesn't know anything
that _we_ know. But nothing," he re-emphasized -- "nothing whatever!"
  "Well, can't she do without that?"
  "Evidently she can -- and evidently she does, beautifully. But the
question is whether _I_ can!"
  He had paused once more with his point -- but she glared, poor
Cornelia, with her wonder. "Surely if you know for yourself---!"
  "Ah, it doesn't seem enough for me to know for [223] myself! One wants
a woman," he argued -- but still, in his prolonged tour, quite without
his scowl -- "to know _for_ one, to know _with_ one. That's what you do
now," he candidly put to her.
  It made her again gape. "Do you mean you want to marry _me_?"
  He was so full of what he did mean, however, that he failed even to
notice it. "She doesn't in the least know, for instance, how old I am."
  "That's because you're so young!"
  "Ah, there you are!" -- and he turned off afresh and as if almost in
disgust. It left her visibly perplexed -- though even the perplexed
Cornelia was still the exceedingly pointed; but he had come to her aid
after another turn. "Remember, please, that I'm pretty well as old as
you."
  She had all her point at least, while she bridled and blinked, for
this. "You're exactly a year and ten months older."
  It checked him there for delight. "You remember my birthday?"
  She twinkled indeed like some far-off light of home. "I remember
everyone's. It's a little way I've always had -- and that I've never
lost."
  He looked at her accomplishment, across the room, as at some striking,
some charming phenomenon. "Well, _that's_ the sort of thing I want!" All
the ripe candour of his eyes confirmed it.
  What could she do therefore, she seemed to ask him, but repeat her
question of a moment before? -- [224] which indeed, presently she made
up her mind to. "Do you want to marry _me_?"
  It had this time better success -- if the term may be felt in any
degree to apply. All his candour, or more of it at least, was in his
slow, mild, kind, considering head-shake. "No, Cornelia -- not to
_marry_ you."
  His discrimination was a wonder; but since she was clearly treating
him now as if everything about him was, so she could as exquisitely meet
it. "Not at least," she convulsively smiled, "until you've honourably
tried Mrs Worthingham. Don't you really _mean_ to?" she gallantly
insisted.
  He waited again a little; then he brought out: "I'll tell you
presently." He came back, and as by still another mere glance over the
room, to what seemed to him so much nearer. "That table _was_ old
Twelfth-Street?"
  "Everything here was."
  "Oh, the pure blessings! With you, ah, with you, I haven't to wear a
green shade." And he had retained meanwhile his small photograph, which
he again showed himself. "Didn't we talk of Mary Cardew?"
  "Why, do you remember it?" -- she marvelled to extravagance.
  "You make me. You connect me with it. You connect it with _me_." He
liked to display to her this excellent use she thus had, the service she
rendered. "There are so many connections -- there will _be_ so [225]
many. I feel how, with you, they must all come up again for me: in fact
you're bringing them out already, just while I look at you, as fast as
ever you can. The fact that you knew every one---!" he went on; yet as
if there were more in that too than he could quite trust himself about.
  "Yes, I knew every one," said Cornelia Rasch; but this time with
perfect simplicity. "I knew, I imagine, more than you do -- or more than
you did."
  It kept him there, it made him wonder with his eyes on her. "Things
about _them_ -- our people?"
  "Our people. Ours only now."
  Ah, such an interest as he felt in this -- taking from her while, so
far from scowling, he almost gaped, all it might mean! "Ours indeed --
and it's awfully good they are; or that we're still here for them!
Nobody else is -- nobody but you: not a cat!"
  "Well, I _am_ a cat!" Cornelia grinned.
  "Do you mean you can tell me things---?" It was too beautiful to
believe.
  "About what really _was_?" She artfully considered, holding him
immensely now. "Well, unless they've come to you with time; unless
you've learned -- or found out."
  "Oh," he reassuringly cried -- reassuringly, it most seemed, for
himself -- "nothing has come to me with time, everything has gone from
me. How I find out now! What creature has an idea---?"
  She threw up her hands with the shrug of old days -- the sharp little
shrug his sisters used to imitate and [226] that she hadn't had to go to
Europe for. The only thing was that he blessed her for bringing it back.
"Ah, the ideas of people now---!"
  "Yes, their ideas are certainly not about _us_." But he ruefully faced
it. "We've none the less, however, to live with them."
  "With their ideas---?" Cornelia questioned.
  "With _them_ -- these modern wonders; such as they are!" Then he went
on: "It must have been to help me you've come back."
  She said nothing for an instant about that, only nodding instead at
his photograph. "What has become of yours? I mean of _her_."
  This time it made him turn pale. "You remember I _have_ one?"
  She kept her eyes on him. "In a 'pork-pie' hat, with her hair in a
long net. That was so 'smart' then; especially with one's skirt looped
up, over one's hooped magenta petticoat, in little festoons, and a row
of very big onyx beads over one's braided velveteen sack -- braided
quite plain and very broad, don't you know?"
  He smiled for her extraordinary possession of these things -- she was
as prompt as if she had had them before her. "Oh, rather -- 'don't I
know?' You wore brown velveteen, and, on those remarkably small hands,
funny gauntlets -- like mine."
  "Oh, do _you_ remember? But like yours?" she wondered.
  "I mean like hers in my photograph." But he [227] came back to the
present picture. "This is better, however, for really showing her lovely
head."
  "Mary's head was a perfection!" Cornelia testified.
  "Yes -- it was better than her heart."
  "Ah, don't say that!" she pleaded. "You weren't fair."
  "Don't you think I was fair?" It interested him immensely -- and the
more that he indeed mightn't have been; which he seemed somehow almost
to hope.
  "She didn't think so -- to the very end."
  "She didn't?" -- ah, the right things Cornelia said to him! But before
she could answer he was studying again closely the small faded face.
"No, she doesn't, she doesn't. Oh, her charming sad eyes and the way
they _say_ that, across the years, straight into mine! But I don't know,
I don't know!" White-Mason quite comfortably sighed.
  His companion appeared to appreciate this effect. "That's just the way
you used to flirt with her, poor thing. Wouldn't you like to have it?"
she asked.
  "This -- for my very own?" He looked up delighted. "I really may?"
  "Well, if you'll give me yours. We'll exchange."
  "That's a charming idea. We'll exchange. But you must come and get it
at my rooms -- where you'll see my things."
  For a little she made no answer -- as if for some [228] feeling. Then
she said: "You asked me just now why I've come back."
  He stared as for the connection; after which with a smile: "Not to do
_that_---?"
  She waited briefly again, but with a queer little look. "I can do
those things now; and -- yes! -- that's in a manner why. I came," she
then said, "because I knew of a sudden one day -- knew as never before
-- that I was old."
  "I see. I see." He quite understood -- she had notes that so struck
him. "And how did you like it?"
  She hesitated -- she decided. "Well, if I liked it, it was on the
principle perhaps on which some people like high game!"
  "High game -- that's good!" he laughed. "Ah, my dear, we're 'high'!"
  She shook her head. "No -- not you -- yet. I at any rate didn't want
any more adventures," Cornelia said.
  He showed their small relic again with assurance. "You wanted _us_.
Then here we are. Oh, how we can talk! -- with all those things you
know! You _are_ an invention. And you'll see there are things _I_ know.
I shall turn up here -- well, daily."
  She took it in, but after a moment only answered. "There was something
you said just now you'd tell me. Don't you mean to try---?"
  "Mrs Worthingham?" He drew from within his coat his pocket-book and
carefully found a place in it for Mary Cardew's carte-de-visite, folding
it [229] together with deliberation over which he put it back. Finally
he spoke. "No -- I've decided. I can't -- I don't want to."
  Cornelia marvelled -- or looked as if she did. "Not for all she has?"
  "Yes -- I know all she has. But I also know all she hasn't. And, as I
told you, she herself doesn't -- hasn't a glimmer of a suspicion of it;
and never will have."
  Cornelia magnanimously thought. "No -- but she knows other things."
  He shook his head as at the portentous heap of them. "Too many -- too
many. And other indeed -- _so_ other. Do you know," he went on, "that
it's as if _you_ -- by turning up for me -- had brought that home to
me?"
  "For you," she candidly considered. "But what -- since you can't marry
me! -- can you do with me?"
  Well, he seemed to have it all. "Everything. I can live with you --
just this way." To illustrate which he dropped into the other chair by
her fire; where, leaning back, he gazed at the flame. "I can't give you
up. It's very curious. It has come over me as it did over you when you
renounced Bognor. That's it -- I know it at last, and I see one can like
it. I'm 'high'. You needn't deny it. That's my taste. I'm old." And in
spite of the considerable glow there of her little household altar he
said it without the scowl. 
