Towards the middle of the eighteenth century there lived in the
Province of Massachusetts a widowed gentlewoman, the mother of three
children, by name Mrs Veronica Wingrave. She had lost her husband early
in life, and had devoted herself to the care of her progeny. These young
persons grew up in a manner to reward her tenderness and to gratify her
highest hopes. The first-born was a son, whom she had called Bernard, in
remembrance of his father. The others were daughters -- born at an
interval of three years apart. Good looks were traditional in the
family, and this youthful trio were not likely to allow the tradition to
perish. The boy was of that fair and ruddy complexion and that athletic
structure which in those days (as in these) were the sign of good
English descent -- a frank, affectionate young fellow, a deferential
son, a patronising brother, a steadfast friend. Clever, however, he was
not; the wit of the family had been apportioned chiefly to his sisters.
The late Mr William Wingrave [312] had been a great reader of
Shakespeare, at a time when this pursuit implied more freedom of thought
than at the present day, and in a community where it required much
courage to patronise the drama even in the closet; and he had wished to
call attention to his admiration of the great poet by calling his
daughters out of his favourite plays. Upon the elder he had bestowed the
romantic name of Rosalind, and the younger he had called Perdita, in
memory of a little girl born between them, who had lived but a few
weeks.
  When Bernard Wingrave came to his sixteenth year his mother put a
brave face upon it and prepared to execute her husband's last
injunction. This had been a formal command that, at the proper age, his
son should be sent out to England, to complete his education at the
university of Oxford, where he himself had acquired his taste for
elegant literature. It was Mrs Wingrave's belief that the lad's equal
was not to be found in the two hemispheres, but she had the old
traditions of literal obedience. She swallowed her sobs, and made up her
boy's trunk and his simple provincial outfit, and sent him on his way
across the seas. Bernard presented himself at his father's college, and
spent five years in England, without great honour, indeed, but with a
vast deal of pleasure and no discredit. On leaving the university he
made the journey to France. In his twenty-fourth year he took ship for
home, prepared to find poor little New England (New England was very
small in those days) a very dull, unfashionable residence. But there had
been changes at home, as well as in [313] Mr Bernard's opinions. He
found his mother's house quite habitable, and his sisters grown into two
very charming young ladies, with all the accomplishments and graces of
the young women of Britain, and a certain native-grown originality and
wildness, which, if it was not an accomplishment, was certainly a grace
the more. Bernard privately assured his mother that his sisters were
fully a match for the most genteel young women in the old country;
whereupon poor Mrs Wingrave, you may be sure, bade them hold up their
heads. Such was Bernard's opinion, and such, in a tenfold higher degree,
was the opinion of Mr Arthur Lloyd. This gentleman was a college-mate of
Mr Bernard, a young man of reputable family, of a good person and a
handsome inheritance; which latter appurtenance he proposed to invest in
trade in the flourishing colony. He and Bernard were sworn friends; they
had crossed the ocean together, and the young American had lost no time
in presenting him at his mother's house, where he had made quite as good
an impression as that which he had received and of which I have just
given a hint.
  The two sisters were at this time in all the freshness of their
youthful bloom; each wearing, of course, this natural brilliancy in the
manner that became her best. They were equally dissimilar in appearance
and character. Rosalind, the elder -- now in her twenty-second year --
was tall and white, with calm gray eyes and auburn tresses; a very faint
likeness to the Rosalind of Shakespeare's comedy, whom I imagine a
brunette [314] (if you will), but a slender, airy creature, full of the
softest, quickest impulses. Miss Wingrave, with her slightly lymphatic
fairness, her fine arms, her majestic height, her slow utterance, was
not cut out for adventures. She would never have put on a man's jacket
and hose; and, indeed, being a very plump beauty, she may have had
reasons apart from her natural dignity. Perdita, too, might very well
have exchanged the sweet melancholy of her name against something more
in consonance with her aspect and disposition. She had the cheek of a
gipsy and the eye of an eager child, as well as the smallest waist and
lightest foot in all the country of the Puritans. When you spoke to her
she never made you wait, as her handsome sister was wont to do (while
she looked at you with a cold fine eye), but gave you your choice of a
dozen answers before you had uttered half your thought.
  The young girls were very glad to see their brother once more; but
they found themselves quite able to spare part of their attention for
their brother's friend. Among the young men their friends and
neighbours, the _belle jeunesse_ of the Colony, there were many
excellent fellows, several devoted swains, and some two or three who
enjoyed the reputation of universal charmers and conquerors. But the
homebred arts and somewhat boisterous gallantry of these honest
colonists were completely eclipsed by the good looks, the fine clothes,
the punctilious courtesy, the perfect elegance, the immense information,
of Mr Arthur Lloyd. He was in reality no paragon; he was a capable,
honourable, civil youth, rich in pounds [315] sterling, in his health
and complacency and his little capital of uninvested affections. But he
was a gentleman; he had a handsome person; he had studied and travelled;
he spoke French, he played on the flute, and he read verses aloud with
very great taste. There were a dozen reasons why Miss Wingrave and her
sister should have thought their other male acquaintance made but a poor
figure before such a perfect man of the world. Mr Lloyd's anecdotes told
our little New England maidens a great deal more of the ways and means
of people of fashion in European capitals than he had any idea of doing.
It was delightful to sit by and hear him and Bernard talk about the fine
people and fine things they had seen. They would all gather round the
fire after tea, in the little wainscoted parlour, and the two young men
would remind each other, across the rug, of this, that and the other
adventure. Rosalind and Perdita would often have given their ears to
know exactly what adventure it was, and where it happened, and who was
there, and what the ladies had on; but in those days a well-bred young
woman was not expected to break into the conversation of her elders, or
to ask too many questions; and the poor girls used therefore to sit
fluttering behind the more languid -- or more discreet -- curiosity of
their mother.


                          -=-=-  2  -=-=-

  That they were both very fine girls Arthur Lloyd was not slow to
discover; but it took him some time to make up his mind whether he liked
the [316] big sister or the little sister best. He had a strong
presentiment -- an emotion of a nature entirely too cheerful to be
called a foreboding -- that he was destined to stand up before the
parson with one of them; yet he was unable to arrive at a preference,
and for such a consummation a preference was certainly necessary, for
Lloyd had too much young blood in his veins to make a choice by lot and
be cheated of the satisfaction of falling in love. He resolved to take
things as they came -- to let his heart speak. Meanwhile he was on a
very pleasant footing. Mrs Wingrave showed a dignified indifference to
his 'intentions', equally remote from a carelessness of her daughter's
honour and from that sharp alacrity to make him come to the point,
which, in his quality of a young man of property, he had too often
encountered in the worldly matrons of his native islands. As for
Bernard, all that he asked was that his friend should treat his sisters
as his own; and as for the poor girls themselves, however each may have
secretly longed that their visitor should do or say something 'marked',
they kept a very modest and contented demeanour.
  Towards each other, however, they were somewhat more on the offensive.
They were good friends enough, and accommodating bedfellows (they shared
the same four-poster), betwixt whom it would take more than a day for
the seeds of jealousy to sprout and bear fruit; but they felt that the
seeds had been sown on the day that Mr Lloyd came into the house. Each
made up her mind that, if she should be slighted, she would [317] bear
her grief in silence, and that no one should be any the wiser; for if
they had a great deal of ambition, they had also a large share of pride.
But each prayed in secret, nevertheless, that upon _her_ the selection,
the distinction, might fall. They had need of a vast deal of patience,
of self-control, of dissimulation. In those days a young girl of decent
breeding could make no advances whatever, and barely respond, indeed, to
those that were made. She was expected to sit still in her chair, with
her eyes on the carpet, watching the spot where the mystic handkerchief
should fall. Poor Arthur Lloyd was obliged to carry on his wooing in the
little wainscoted parlour, before the eyes of Mrs Wingrave, her son, and
his prospective sister-in-law. But youth and love are so cunning that a
hundred signs and tokens might travel to and fro, and not one of these
three pairs of eyes detect them in their passage. The two maidens were
almost always together, and had plenty of chances to betray themselves.
That each knew she was being watched, however, made not a grain of
difference in the little offices they mutually rendered, or in the
various household tasks they performed in common. Neither flinched nor
fluttered beneath the silent battery of her sister's eyes. The only
apparent change in their habits was that they had less to say to each
other. It was impossible to talk about Mr Lloyd, and it was ridiculous
to talk about anything else. By tacit agreement they began to wear all
their choice finery, and to devise such little implements of conquest,
in the way of ribbons and top-knots and kerchiefs, as were sanctioned
[318] by indubitable modesty. They executed in the same inarticulate
fashion a contract of fair play in this exciting game. "Is it better
so?" Rosalind would ask, tying a bunch of ribbons on her bosom, and
turning about from her glass to her sister. Perdita would look up
gravely from her work and examine the decoration. "I think you had
better give it another loop," she would say, with great solemnity,
looking hard at her sister with eyes that added, 'upon my honour!' So
they were for ever stitching and trimming their petticoats, and pressing
out their muslins, and contriving washes and ointments and cosmetics,
like the ladies in the household of the vicar of Wakefield. Some three
or four months went by; it grew to be midwinter, and as yet Rosalind
knew that if Perdita had nothing more to boast of than she, there was
not much to be feared from her rivalry. But Perdita by this time -- the
charming Perdita -- felt that her secret had grown to be tenfold more
precious than her sister's.
  One afternoon Miss Wingrave sat alone -- that was a rare accident --
before her toilet-glass, combing out her long hair. It was getting too
dark to see; she lit the two candles in their sockets, on the frame of
her mirror, and then went to the window to draw her curtains. It was a
gray December evening; the landscape was bare and bleak, and the sky
heavy with snow-clouds. At the end of the large garden into which her
window looked was a wall with a little postern door, opening into a
lane. The door stood ajar, as she could vaguely see in the gathering
darkness, and moved [319] slowly to and fro, as if some one were swaying
it from the lane without. It was doubtless a servant-maid who had been
having a tryst with her sweetheart. But as she was about to drop her
curtain Rosalind saw her sister step into the garden and hurry along the
path which led to the house. She dropped the curtain, all save a little
crevice for her eyes. As Perdita came up the path she seemed to be
examining something in her hand, holding it close to her eyes. When she
reached the house she stopped a moment, looked intently at the object,
and pressed it to her lips.
  Poor Rosalind slowly came back to her chair and sat down before her
glass, where, if she had looked at it less abstractedly, she would have
seen her handsome features sadly disfigured by jealousy. A moment
afterwards the door opened behind her and her sister came into the room,
out of breath, and her cheeks aglow with the chilly air.
  Perdita started. "Ah," said she, "I thought you were with our mother."
The ladies were to go to a tea-party, and on such occasions it was the
habit of one of the young girls to help their mother to dress. Instead
of coming in, Perdita lingered at the door.
  "Come in, come in," said Rosalind. "We have more than an hour yet. I
should like you very much to give a few strokes to my hair." She knew
that her sister wished to retreat, and that she could see in the glass
all her movements in the room. "Nay, just help me with my hair," she
said, "and I will go to mamma."
  Perdita came reluctantly, and took the brush. She saw her sister's
eyes, in the glass, fastened [320] hard upon her hands. She had not made
three passes when Rosalind clapped her own right hand upon her sister's
left, and started out of her chair. "Whose ring is that?" she cried,
passionately, drawing her towards the light.
  On the young girl's third finger glistened a little gold ring, adorned
with a very small sapphire. Perdita felt that she need no longer keep
her secret, yet that she must put a bold face on her avowal. "It's
mine," she said proudly.
  "Who gave it to you?" cried the other.
  Perdita hesitated a moment. "Mr Lloyd."
  "Mr Lloyd is generous, all of a sudden."
  "Ah no," cried Perdita, with spirit, "not all of a sudden! He offered
it to me a month ago."
  "And you needed a month's begging to take it?" said Rosalind, looking
at the little trinket, which indeed was not especially elegant, although
it was the best that the jeweller of the Province could furnish. "I
wouldn't have taken it in less than two."
  "It isn't the ring," Perdita answered, "it's what it means!"
  "It means that you are not a modest girl!" cried Rosalind. "Pray, does
your mother know of your intrigue? does Bernard?"
  "My mother has approved my 'intrigue', as you call it. Mr Lloyd has
asked for my hand, and mamma has given it. Would you have had him apply
to you, dearest sister?"
  Rosalind gave her companion a long look, full of passionate envy and
sorrow. Then she dropped her lashes on her pale cheeks and turned away.
Perdita felt that it had not been a pretty scene; [321] but it was her
sister's fault. However, the elder girl rapidly called back her pride,
and turned herself about again. "You have my very best wishes," she
said, with a low curtsey. "I wish you every happiness, and a very long
life."
  Perdita gave a bitter laugh. "Don't speak in that tone!" she cried. "I
would rather you should curse me outright. Come, Rosy," she added, "he
couldn't marry both of us."
  "I wish you very great joy," Rosalind repeated, mechanically, sitting
down to her glass again, "and a very long life, and plenty of children."
  There was something in the sound of these words not at all to
Perdita's taste. "Will you give me a year to live at least?" she said.
"In a year I can have one little boy -- or one little girl at least. If
you will give me your brush again I will do your hair."
  "Thank you," said Rosalind. "You had better go to mamma. It isn't
becoming that a young lady with a promised husband should wait on a girl
with none."
  "Nay," said Perdita, good-humouredly, "I have Arthur to wait upon me.
You need my service more than I need yours."
  But her sister motioned her away, and she left the room. When she had
gone poor Rosalind fell on her knees before her dressing-table, buried
her head in her arms, and poured out a flood of tears and sobs. She felt
very much the better for this effusion of sorrow. When her sister came
back she insisted upon helping her to dress -- on her wearing her
prettiest things. She forced upon [322] her acceptance a bit of lace of
her own, and declared that now that she was to be married she should do
her best to appear worthy of her lover's choice. She discharged these
offices in stern silence; but, such as they were, they had to do duty as
an apology and an atonement; she never made any other.
  Now that Lloyd was received by the family as an accepted suitor
nothing remained but to fix the wedding-day. It was appointed for the
following April, and in the interval preparations were diligently made
for the marriage. Lloyd, on his side, was busy with his commercial
arrangements, and with establishing a correspondence with the great
mercantile house to which he had attached himself in England. He was
therefore not so frequent a visitor at Mrs Wingrave's as during the
months of his diffidence and irresolution, and poor Rosalind had less to
suffer than she had feared from the sight of the mutual endearments of
the young lovers. Touching his future sister-in-law Lloyd had a
perfectly clear conscience. There had not been a particle of love-making
between them, and he had not the slightest suspicion that he had dealt
her a terrible blow. He was quite at his ease; life promised so well,
both domestically and financially. The great revolt of the Colonies was
not yet in the air, and that his connubial felicity should take a tragic
turn it was absurd, it was blasphemous, to apprehend. Meanwhile, at Mrs
Wingrave's, there was a greater rustling of silks, a more rapid clicking
of scissors and flying of needles, than ever. The good lady [323] had
determined that her daughter should carry from home the genteelest
outfit that her money could buy or that the country could furnish. All
the sage women in the Province were convened, and their united taste was
brought to bear on Perdita's wardrobe. Rosalind's situation, at this
moment, was assuredly not to be envied. The poor girl had an inordinate
love of dress, and the very best taste in the world, as her sister
perfectly well knew. Rosalind was tall, she was stately and sweeping,
she was made to carry stiff brocade and masses of heavy lace, such as
belong to the toilet of a rich man's wife. But Rosalind sat aloof, with
her beautiful arms folded and her head averted, while her mother and
sister and the venerable women aforesaid worried and wondered over their
materials, oppressed by the multitude of their resources. One day there
came in a beautiful piece of white silk, brocaded with heavenly blue and
silver, sent by the bridegroom himself -- it not being thought amiss in
those days that the husband-elect should contribute to the bride's
trousseau. Perdita could think of no form or fashion which would do
sufficient honour to the splendour of the material.
  "Blue's your colour, sister, more than mine," she said, with appealing
eyes. "It's a pity it's not for you. You would know what to do with it."
  Rosalind got up from her place and looked at the great shining fabric,
as it lay spread over the back of a chair. Then she took it up in her
hands and felt it -- lovingly, as Perdita could see -- and turned about
toward the mirror with it. She let [324] it roll down to her feet, and
flung the other end over her shoulder, gathering it in about her waist
with her white arm, which was bare to the elbow. She threw back her
head, and looked at her image, and a hanging tress of her auburn hair
fell upon the gorgeous surface of the silk. It made a dazzling picture.
The women standing about uttered a little "Look, look!" of admiration.
"Yes, indeed," said Rosalind, quietly, "blue is my colour." But Perdita
could see that her fancy had been stirred, and that she would now fall
to work and solve all their silken riddles. And indeed she behaved very
well, as Perdita, knowing her insatiable love of millinery, was quite
ready to declare. Innumerable yards of lustrous silk and satin, of
muslin, velvet and lace, passed through her cunning hands, without a
jealous word coming from her lips. Thanks to her industry, when the
wedding-day came Perdita was prepared to espouse more of the vanities of
life than any fluttering young bride who had yet received the
sacramental blessing of a New England divine.
  It had been arranged that the young couple should go out and spend the
first days of their wedded life at the country-house of an English
gentleman -- a man of rank and a very kind friend to Arthur Lloyd. He
was a bachelor; he declared he should be delighted to give up the place
to the influence of Hymen. After the ceremony at church -- it had been
performed by an English clergyman -- young Mrs Lloyd hastened back to
her mother's house to change her nuptial robes for a riding-dress.
Rosalind helped her to effect the [325] change, in the little homely
room in which they had spent their undivided younger years. Perdita then
hurried off to bid farewell to her mother, leaving Rosalind to follow.
The parting was short; the horses were at the door, and Arthur was
impatient to start. But Rosalind had not followed, and Perdita hastened
back to her room, opening the door abruptly. Rosalind, as usual, was
before the glass, but in a position which caused the other to stand
still, amazed. She had dressed herself in Perdita's cast-off wedding
veil and wreath, and on her neck she had hung the full string of pearls
which the young girl had received from her husband as a wedding-gift.
These things had been hastily laid aside, to await their possessor's
disposal on her return from the country. Bedizened in this unnatural
garb Rosalind stood before the mirror, plunging a long look into its
depths and reading heaven knows what audacious visions. Perdita was
horrified. It was a hideous image of their old rivalry come to life
again. She made a step toward her sister, as if to pull off the veil and
the flowers. But catching her eyes in the glass, she stopped.
  "Farewell, sweetheart," she said. "You might at least have waited till
I had got out of the house!" And she hurried away from the room.
  Mr Lloyd had purchased in Boston a house which to the taste of those
days appeared as elegant as it was commodious; and here he very soon
established himself with his young wife. He was thus separated by a
distance of twenty miles from the residence of his mother-in-law. Twenty
[326] miles, in that primitive era of roads and conveyances, were as
serious a matter as a hundred at the present day, and Mrs Wingrave saw
but little of her daughter during the first twelvemonth of her marriage.
She suffered in no small degree from Perdita's absence; and her
affliction was not diminished by the fact that Rosalind had fallen into
terribly low spirits and was not to be roused or cheered but by change
of air and company. The real cause of the young lady's dejection the
reader will not be slow to suspect. Mrs Wingrave and her gossips,
however, deemed her complaint a mere bodily ill, and doubted not that
she would obtain relief from the remedy just mentioned. Her mother
accordingly proposed, on her behalf, a visit to certain relatives on the
paternal side, established in New York, who had long complained that
they were able to see so little of their New England cousins. Rosalind
was despatched to these good people, under a suitable escort, and
remained with them for several months. In the interval her brother
Bernard, who had begun the practice of the law, made up his mind to take
a wife. Rosalind came home to the wedding, apparently cured of her
heartache, with bright roses and lilies in her face and a proud smile on
her lips. Arthur Lloyd came over from Boston to see his brother-in-law
married, but without his wife, who was expecting very soon to present
him with an heir. It was nearly a year since Rosalind had seen him. She
was glad -- she hardly knew why -- that Perdita had stayed at home.
Arthur looked happy, but he was more grave and important [327] than
before his marriage. She thought he looked 'interesting' -- for although
the word, in its modern sense, was not then invented, we may be sure
that the idea was. The truth is, he was simply anxious about his wife
and her coming ordeal. Nevertheless, he by no means failed to observe
Rosalind's beauty and splendour, and to note how she effaced the poor
little bride. The allowance that Perdita had enjoyed for her dress had
now been transferred to her sister, who turned it to wonderful account.
On the morning after the wedding he had a lady's saddle put on the horse
of the servant who had come with him from town, and went out with the
young girl for a ride. It was a keen, clear morning in January; the
ground was bare and hard, and the horses in good condition -- to say
nothing of Rosalind, who was charming in her hat and plume, and her dark
blue riding coat, trimmed with fur. They rode all the morning, they lost
their way, and were obliged to stop for dinner at a farm-house. The
early winter dusk had fallen when they got home. Mrs Wingrave met them
with a long face. A messenger had arrived at noon from Mrs Lloyd; she
was beginning to be ill, she desired her husband's immediate return. The
young man, at the thought that he had lost several hours, and that by
hard riding he might already have been with his wife, uttered a
passionate oath. He barely consented to stop for a mouthful of supper,
but mounted the messenger's horse and started off at a gallop.
  He reached home at midnight. His wife had [328] been delivered of a
little girl. "Ah, why weren't you with me?" she said, as he came to her
bedside.
  "I was out of the house when the man came. I was with Rosalind," said
Lloyd, innocently.
  Mrs Lloyd made a little moan, and turned away. But she continued to do
very well, and for a week her improvement was uninterrupted. Finally,
however, through some indiscretion in the way of diet or exposure, it
was checked, and the poor lady grew rapidly worse. Lloyd was in despair.
It very soon became evident that she was breathing her last. Mrs Lloyd
came to a sense of her approaching end, and declared that she was
reconciled with death. On the third evening after the change took place
she told her husband that she felt she should not get through the night.
She dismissed her servants, and also requested her mother to withdraw --
Mrs Wingrave having arrived on the preceding day. She had had her infant
placed on the bed beside her, and she lay on her side, with the child
against her breast, holding her husband's hands. The night-lamp was
hidden behind the heavy curtains of the bed, but the room was illumined
with a red glow from the immense fire of logs on the hearth.
  "It seems strange not to be warmed into life by such a fire as that,"
the young woman said, feebly trying to smile. "If I had but a little of
it in my veins! But I have given all _my_ fire to this little spark of
mortality." And she dropped her eyes on her child. Then raising them she
looked at her husband with a long, penetrating gaze. The last feeling
which lingered in her [329] heart was one of suspicion. She had not
recovered from the shock which Arthur had given her by telling her that
in the hour of her agony he had been with Rosalind. She trusted her
husband very nearly as well as she loved him; but now that she was
called away for ever she felt a cold horror of her sister. She felt in
her soul that Rosalind had never ceased to be jealous of her good
fortune; and a year of happy security had not effaced the young girl's
image, dressed in her wedding-garments, and smiling with simulated
triumph. Now that Arthur was to be alone, what might not Rosalind
attempt? She was beautiful, she was engaging; what arts might she not
use, what impression might she not make upon the young man's saddened
heart? Mrs Lloyd looked at her husband in silence. It seemed hard, after
all, to doubt of his constancy. His fine eyes were filled with tears;
his face was convulsed with weeping; the clasp of his hands was warm and
passionate. How noble he looked, how tender, how faithful and devoted!
'Nay,' thought Perdita, 'he's not for such a one as Rosalind. He'll
never forget me. Nor does Rosalind truly care for him; she cares only
for vanities and finery and jewels.' And she lowered her eyes on her
white hands, which her husband's liberality had covered with rings, and
on the lace ruffles which trimmed the edge of her night-dress. 'She
covets my rings and my laces more than she covets my husband.'
  At this moment the thought of her sister's rapacity seemed to cast a
dark shadow between [330] her and the helpless figure of her little
girl. "Arthur," she said, "you must take off my rings. I shall not be
buried in them. One of these days my daughter shall wear them -- my
rings and my laces and silks. I had them all brought out and shown me
to-day. It's a great wardrobe -- there's not such another in the
Province; I can say it without vanity, now that I have done with it. It
will be a great inheritance for my daughter when she grows into a young
woman. There are things there that a man never buys twice, and if they
are lost you will never again see the like. So you will watch them well.
Some dozen things I have left to Rosalind; I have named them to my
mother. I have given her that blue and silver; it was meant for her; I
wore it only once, I looked ill in it. But the rest are to be sacredly
kept for this little innocent. It's such a providence that she should be
my colour; she can wear my gowns; she has her mother's eyes. You know
the same fashions come back every twenty years. She can wear my gowns as
they are. They will lie there quietly waiting till she grows into them
-- wrapped in camphor and rose-leaves, and keeping their colours in the
sweet-scented darkness. She shall have black hair, she shall wear my
carnation satin. Do you promise me, Arthur?"
  "Promise you what, dearest?"
  "Promise me to keep your poor little wife's old gowns."
  "Are you afraid I shall sell them?"
  "No, but that they may get scattered. My mother will have them
properly wrapped up, and [331] you shall lay them away under a
double-lock. Do you know the great chest in the attic, with the iron
bands? There is no end to what it will hold. You can put them all there.
My mother and the housekeeper will do it, and give you the key. And you
will keep the key in your secretary, and never give it to any one but
your child. Do you promise me?"
  "Ah, yes, I promise you," said Lloyd, puzzled at the intensity with
which his wife appeared to cling to this idea.
  "Will you swear?" repeated Perdita.
  "Yes, I swear."
  "Well -- I trust you -- I trust you," said the poor lady, looking into
his eyes with eyes in which, if he had suspected her vague
apprehensions, he might have read an appeal quite as much as an
assurance.
  Lloyd bore his bereavement rationally and manfully. A month after his
wife's death, in the course of business, circumstances arose which
offered him an opportunity of going to England. He took advantage of it,
to change the current of his thoughts. He was absent nearly a year,
during which his little girl was tenderly nursed and guarded by her
grandmother. On his return he had his house again thrown open, and
announced his intention of keeping the same state as during his wife's
lifetime. It very soon came to be predicted that he would marry again,
and there were at least a dozen young women of whom one may say that it
was by no fault of theirs that, for six months after his return, the
prediction did [332] not come true. During this interval he still left
his little daughter in Mrs Wingrave's hands, the latter assuring him
that a change of residence at so tender an age would be full of danger
for her health. Finally, however, he declared that his heart longed for
his daughter's presence and that she must be brought up to town. He sent
his coach and his housekeeper to fetch her home. Mrs Wingrave was in
terror lest something should befall her on the road; and, in accordance
with this feeling, Rosalind offered to accompany her. She could return
the next day. So she went up to town with her little niece, and Mr Lloyd
met her on the threshold of his house, overcome with her kindness and
with paternal joy. Instead of returning the next day Rosalind stayed out
the week; and when at last she reappeared, she had only come for her
clothes. Arthur would not hear of her coming home, nor would the baby.
That little person cried and choked if Rosalind left her; and at the
sight of her grief Arthur lost his wits, and swore that she was going to
die. In fine, nothing would suit them but that the aunt should remain
until the little niece had grown used to strange faces.
  It took two months to bring this consummation about; for it was not
until this period had elapsed that Rosalind took leave of her
brother-in-law. Mrs Wingrave had shaken her head over her daughter's
absence; she had declared that it was not becoming, that it was the talk
of the whole country. She had reconciled herself to it only because,
during the girl's visit, the household [333] enjoyed an unwonted term of
peace. Bernard Wingrave had brought his wife home to live, between whom
and her sister-in-law there was as little love as you please. Rosalind
was perhaps no angel; but in the daily practice of life she was a
sufficiently good-natured girl, and if she quarrelled with Mrs Bernard,
it was not without provocation. Quarrel, however, she did, to the great
annoyance not only of her antagonist, but of the two spectators of these
constant altercations. Her stay in the household of her brother-in-law,
therefore, would have been delightful, if only because it removed her
from contact with the object of her antipathy at home. It was doubly --
it was ten times -- delightful, in that it kept her near the object of
her early passion. Mrs Lloyd's sharp suspicions had fallen very far
short of the truth. Rosalind's sentiment had been a passion at first,
and a passion it remained -- a passion of whose radiant heat, tempered
to the delicate state of his feelings, Mr Lloyd very soon felt the
influence. Lloyd, as I have hinted, was not a modern Petrarch; it was
not in his nature to practise an ideal constancy. He had not been many
days in the house with his sister-in-law before he began to assure
himself that she was, in the language of that day, a devilish fine
woman. Whether Rosalind really practised those insidious arts that her
sister had been tempted to impute to her it is needless to inquire. It
is enough to say that she found means to appear to the very best
advantage. She used to seat herself every morning before the big
fireplace in the dining-room, [334] at work upon a piece of tapestry,
with her little niece disporting herself on the carpet at her feet, or
on the train of her dress, and playing with her woollen balls. Lloyd
would have been a very stupid fellow if he had remained insensible to
the rich suggestions of this charming picture. He was exceedingly fond
of his little girl, and was never weary of taking her in his arms and
tossing her up and down, and making her crow with delight. Very often,
however, he would venture upon greater liberties than the young lady was
yet prepared to allow, and then she would suddenly vociferate her
displeasure. Rosalind, at this, would drop her tapestry, and put out her
handsome hands with the serious smile of the young girl whose virgin
fancy has revealed to her all a mother's healing arts. Lloyd would give
up the child, their eyes would meet, their hands would touch, and
Rosalind would extinguish the little girl's sobs upon the snowy folds of
the kerchief that crossed her bosom. Her dignity was perfect, and
nothing could be more discreet than the manner in which she accepted her
brother-in-law's hospitality. It may almost be said, perhaps, that there
was something harsh in her reserve. Lloyd had a provoking feeling that
she was in the house and yet was unapproachable. Half-an-hour after
supper, at the very outset of the long winter evenings, she would light
her candle, make the young man a most respectful curtsey, and march off
to bed. If these were arts, Rosalind was a great artist. But their
effect was so gentle, so gradual, they were calculated to work upon the
[335] young widower's fancy with a _crescendo_ so finely shaded, that,
as the reader has seen, several weeks elapsed before Rosalind began to
feel sure that her returns would cover her outlay. When this became
morally certain she packed up her trunk and returned to her mother's
house. For three days she waited; on the fourth Mr Lloyd made his
appearance -- a respectful but pressing suitor. Rosalind heard him to
the end, with great humility, and accepted him with infinite modesty. It
is hard to imagine that Mrs Lloyd would have forgiven her husband; but
if anything might have disarmed her resentment it would have been the
ceremonious continence of this interview. Rosalind imposed upon her
lover but a short probation. They were married, as was becoming, with
great privacy -- almost with secrecy -- in the hope perhaps, as was
waggishly remarked at the time, that the late Mrs Lloyd wouldn't hear of
it.
  The marriage was to all appearance a happy one, and each party
obtained what each had desired -- Lloyd 'a devilish fine woman', and
Rosalind -- but Rosalind's desires, as the reader will have observed,
had remained a good deal of a mystery. There were, indeed, two blots
upon their felicity, but time would perhaps efface them. During the
first three years of her marriage Mrs Lloyd failed to become a mother,
and her husband on his side suffered heavy losses of money. This latter
circumstance compelled a material retrenchment in his expenditure, and
Rosalind was perforce less of a fine lady than her sister had been. She
contrived, however, to carry it like a woman of [336] considerable
fashion. She had long since ascertained that her sister's copious
wardrobe had been sequestrated for the benefit of her daughter, and that
it lay languishing in thankless gloom in the dusty attic. It was a
revolting thought that these exquisite fabrics should await the good
pleasure of a little girl who sat in a high chair and ate bread-and-milk
with a wooden spoon. Rosalind had the good taste, however, to say
nothing about the matter until several months had expired. Then, at
last, she timidly broached it to her husband. Was it not a pity that so
much finery should be lost? -- for lost it would be, what with colours
fading, and moths eating it up, and the change of fashions. But Lloyd
gave her so abrupt and peremptory a refusal, that she saw, for the
present, her attempt was vain. Six months went by, however, and brought
with them new needs and new visions. Rosalind's thoughts hovered
lovingly about her sister's relics. She went up and looked at the chest
in which they lay imprisoned. There was a sullen defiance in its three
great padlocks and its iron bands which only quickened her cupidity.
There was something exasperating in its incorruptible immobility. It was
like a grim and grizzled old household servant, who locks his jaws over
a family secret. And then there was a look of capacity in its vast
extent, and a sound as of dense fulness, when Rosalind knocked its side
with the toe of her little shoe, which caused her to flush with baffled
longing. "It's absurd," she cried; "it's improper, it's wicked"; and she
forthwith resolved upon [337] another attack upon her husband. On the
following day, after dinner, when he had had his wine, she boldly began
it. But he cut her short with great sternness.
  "Once for all, Rosalind," said he, "it's out of the question. I shall
be gravely displeased if you return to the matter."
  "Very good," said Rosalind. "I am glad to learn the esteem in which I
am held. Gracious heaven," she cried, "I am a very happy woman! It's an
agreeable thing to feel one's self sacrificed to a caprice!" And her
eyes filled with tears of anger and disappointment.
  Lloyd had a good-natured man's horror of a woman's sobs, and he
attempted -- I may say he condescended -- to explain. "It's not a
caprice, dear, it's a promise," he said -- "an oath."
  "An oath? It's a pretty matter for oaths! and to whom, pray?"
  "To Perdita," said the young man, raising his eyes for an instant, but
immediately dropping them.
  "Perdita -- ah, Perdita!" and Rosalind's tears broke forth. Her bosom
heaved with stormy sobs -- sobs which were the long-deferred sequel of
the violent fit of weeping in which she had indulged herself on the
night when she discovered her sister's betrothal. She had hoped, in her
better moments, that she had done with her jealousy; but her temper, on
that occasion, had taken an ineffaceable fold. "And pray, what right had
Perdita to dispose of my future?" she cried. "What right had she to bind
you to meanness [338] and cruelty? Ah, I occupy a dignified place, and I
make a very fine figure! I am welcome to what Perdita has left! And what
has she left? I never knew till now how little! Nothing, nothing,
nothing."
  This was very poor logic, but it was very good as a 'scene'. Lloyd put
his arm around his wife's waist and tried to kiss her, but she shook him
off with magnificent scorn. Poor fellow! he had coveted a 'devilish fine
woman', and he had got one. Her scorn was intolerable. He walked away
with his ears tingling -- irresolute, distracted. Before him was his
secretary, and in it the sacred key which with his own hand he had
turned in the triple lock. He marched up and opened it, and took the key
from a secret drawer, wrapped in a little packet which he had sealed
with his own honest bit of blazonry. _Je garde_, said the motto -- 'I
keep'. But he was ashamed to put it back. He flung it upon the table
beside his wife.
  "Put it back!" she cried. "I want it not. I hate it!"
  "I wash my hands of it," cried her husband. "God forgive me!"
  Mrs Lloyd gave an indignant shrug of her shoulders, and swept out of
the room, while the young man retreated by another door. Ten minutes
later Mrs Lloyd returned, and found the room occupied by her little
step-daughter and the nursery-maid. The key was not on the table. She
glanced at the child. Her little niece was perched on a chair, with the
packet in her hands. She had broken the seal with her own small [339]
fingers. Mrs Lloyd hastily took possession of the key.
  At the habitual supper-hour Arthur Lloyd came back from his
counting-room. It was the month of June, and supper was served by
daylight. The meal was placed on the table, but Mrs Lloyd failed to make
her appearance. The servant whom his master sent to call her came back
with the assurance that her room was empty, and that the women informed
him that she had not been seen since dinner. They had, in truth,
observed her to have been in tears, and, supposing her to be shut up in
her chamber, had not disturbed her. Her husband called her name in
various parts of the house, but without response. At last it occurred to
him that he might find her by taking the way to the attic. The thought
gave him a strange feeling of discomfort, and he bade his servants
remain behind, wishing no witness in his quest. He reached the foot of
the staircase leading to the topmost flat, and stood with his hand on
the banisters, pronouncing his wife's name. His voice trembled. He
called again louder and more firmly. The only sound which disturbed the
absolute silence was a faint echo of his own tones, repeating his
question under the great eaves. He nevertheless felt irresistibly moved
to ascend the staircase. It opened upon a wide hall, lined with wooden
closets, and terminating in a window which looked westward, and admitted
the last rays of the sun. Before the window stood the great chest.
Before the chest, on her knees, the young man saw with amazement and
horror [340] the figure of his wife. In an instant he crossed the
interval between them, bereft of utterance. The lid of the chest stood
open, exposing, amid their perfumed napkins, its treasure of stuffs and
jewels. Rosalind had fallen backward from a kneeling posture, with one
hand supporting her on the floor and the other pressed to her heart. On
her limbs was the stiffness of death, and on her face, in the fading
light of the sun, the terror of something more than death. Her lips were
parted in entreaty, in dismay, in agony; and on her blanched brow and
cheeks there glowed the marks of ten hideous wounds from two vengeful
ghostly hands.

