When, a few years since, two good ladies, previously not intimate nor
indeed more than slightly acquainted, found themselves domiciled
together in the small but ancient town of Marr, it was as a result,
naturally, of special considerations. They bore the same name and were
second cousins; but their paths had not hitherto crossed; there had not
been coincidence of age to draw them together; and Miss Frush, the more
mature, had spent much of her life abroad. She was a bland, shy,
sketching person, whom fate had condemned to a monotony -- triumphing
over variety -- of Swiss and Italian _pensions_; in any one of which,
with her well-fastened hat, her gauntlets and her stout boots, her
camp-stool, her sketch-book, her Tauchnitz novel, she would have served
with peculiar propriety as a frontispiece to the natural history of the
English old maid. She would have struck you indeed, poor Miss Frush, as
so happy an instance of the type that you would perhaps scarce have been
able to equip her with the dignity of the individual. This was what she
enjoyed, however, for those brought nearer -- a very insistent identity,
once even of prettiness, but which now, blanched and [291] bony, timid
and inordinately queer, with its utterance all vague interjection and
its aspect all eyeglass and teeth, might be acknowledged without
inconvenience and deplored without reserve. Miss Amy, her kinswoman,
who, ten years her junior, showed a different figure -- such as, oddly
enough, though formed almost wholly in English air, might have appeared
much more to betray a foreign influence -- Miss Amy was brown, brisk and
expressive: when really young she had even been pronounced showy. She
had an innocent vanity on the subject of her foot, a member which she
somehow regarded as a guarantee of her wit, or at least of her good
taste. Even had it not been pretty she flattered herself it would have
been shod: she would never -- no, never, like Susan -- have given it up.
Her bright brown eye was comparatively bold, and she had accepted Susan
once for all as a frump. She even thought her, and silently deplored her
as, a goose. But she was none the less herself a lamb.
  They had benefited, this innocuous pair, under the will of an old
aunt, a prodigiously ancient gentlewoman, of whom, in her later time, it
had been given them, mainly by the office of others, to see almost
nothing; so that the little property they came in for had the happy
effect of a windfall. Each, at least, pretended to the other that she
had never dreamed -- as in truth there had been small encouragement for
dreams in the sad character of what they now spoke of as the late lady's
'dreadful _entourage_'. Terrorised and deceived, as they considered, by
her own people, Mrs Frush was scantily enough to have been counted on
for an act of almost inspired justice. The good luck of her husband's
nieces was that she [292] had really outlived, for the most part, their
ill-wishers and so, at the very last, had died without the blame of
diverting fine Frush property from fine Frush use. Property quite of her
own she had done as she liked with; but she had pitied poor expatriated
Susan and had remembered poor unhusbanded Amy, though lumping them
together perhaps a little roughly in her final provision. Her will
directed that, should no other arrangement be more convenient to her
executors, the old house at Marr might be sold for their joint
advantage. What befell, however, in the event, was that the two
legatees, advised in due course, took an early occasion -- and quite
without concert -- to judge their prospects on the spot. They arrived at
Marr, each on her own side, and they were so pleased with Marr that they
remained. So it was that they met: Miss Amy, accompanied by the
office-boy of the local solicitor, presented herself at the door of the
house to ask admittance of the caretaker. But when the door opened it
offered to sight not the caretaker, but an unexpected, unexpecting lady
in a very old waterproof, who held a long-handled eyeglass very much as
a child holds a rattle. Miss Susan, already in the field, roaming,
prying, meditating in the absence on an errand of the woman in charge,
offered herself in this manner as in settled possession; and it was on
that idea that, through the eyeglass, the cousins viewed each other with
some penetration even before Amy came in. Then at last when Amy did come
in it was not, any more than Susan, to go out again.
  It would take us too far to imagine what might have happened had Mrs
Frush made it a condition of her benevolence that the subjects of it
should inhabit, [293] should live at peace together, under the roof she
left them; but certain it is that as they stood there they had at the
same moment the same unprompted thought. Each became aware on the spot
that the dear old house itself was exactly what she, and exactly what
the other, wanted; it met in perfection their longing for a quiet
harbour and an assured future; each, in short, was willing to take the
other in order to get the house. It was therefore not sold; it was made,
instead, their own, as it stood, with the dead lady's extremely 'good'
old appurtenances not only undisturbed and undivided, but piously
reconstructed and infinitely admired, the agents of her testamentary
purpose rejoicing meanwhile to see the business so simplified. They
might have had their private doubts -- or their wives might have; might
cynically have predicted the sharpest of quarrels, before three months
were out, between the deluded yoke-fellows, and the dissolution of the
partnership with every circumstance of recrimination. All that need be
said is that such prophets would have prophesied vulgarly. The Misses
Frush were not vulgar; they had drunk deep of the cup of singleness and
found it prevailingly bitter; they were not unacquainted with solitude
and sadness, and they recognised with due humility the supreme
opportunity of their lives. By the end of three months, moreover, each
knew the worst about the other. Miss Amy took her evening nap before
dinner, an hour at which Miss Susan could never sleep -- it was so odd;
whereby Miss Susan took hers after that meal, just at the hour when Miss
Amy was keenest for talk. Miss Susan, erect and unsupported, had
feelings as to the way in which, in [294] almost any posture that could
pass for a seated one, Miss Amy managed to find a place in the small of
her back for two out of the three sofa-cushions -- a smaller place,
obviously, than they had ever been intended to fit.
  But when this was said all was said; they continued to have, on either
side, the pleasant consciousness of a personal soil, not devoid of
fragmentary ruins, to dig in. They had a theory that their lives had
been immensely different, and each appeared now to the other to have
conducted her career so perversely only that she should have an
unfamiliar range of anecdote for her companion's ear. Miss Susan, at
foreign _pensions_, had met the Russian, the Polish, the Danish, and
even an occasional flower of the English, nobility, as well as many of
the most extraordinary Americans, who, as she said, had made everything
of her and with whom she had remained, often, in correspondence; while
Miss Amy, after all less conventional, at the end of long years of
London, abounded in reminiscences of literary, artistic and even -- Miss
Susan heard it with bated breath -- theatrical society, under the
influence of which she had written -- there, it came out! -- a novel
that had been anonymously published and a play that had been strikingly
type-copied. Not the least charm, clearly, of this picturesque outlook
at Marr would be the support that might be drawn from it for getting
back, as she hinted, with 'general society' bravely sacrificed, to 'real
work'. She had in her head hundreds of plots -- with which the future,
accordingly, seemed to bristle for Miss Susan. The latter, on her side,
was only waiting for the wind to go down to take up again her sketching.
The wind at [295] Marr was often high, as was natural in a little old
huddled, red-roofed, historic south-coast town which had once been in a
manner mistress, as the cousins reminded each other, of the 'Channel',
and from which, high and dry on its hilltop though it might be, the sea
had not so far receded as not to give, constantly, a taste of temper.
Miss Susan came back to English scenery with a small sigh of fondness to
which the consciousness of Alps and Apennines only gave more of a
quaver; she had picked out her subjects and, with her head on one side
and a sense that they were easier abroad, sat sucking her water-colour
brush and nervously -- perhaps even a little inconsistently -- waiting
and hesitating. What had happened was that they had, each for herself,
re-discovered the country; only Miss Amy, emergent from Bloomsbury
lodgings, spoke of it as primroses and sunsets, and Miss Susan,
rebounding from the Arno and the Reuss, called it, with a shy, synthetic
pride, simply England.
  The country was at any rate in the house with them as well as in the
little green girdle and in the big blue belt. It was in the objects and
relics that they handled together and wondered over, finding in them a
ground for much inferred importance and invoked romance, stuffing large
stories into very small openings and every faded bell-rope that might
jingle rustily into the past. They were still here in the presence, at
all events, of their common ancestors, as to whom, more than ever
before, they took only the best for granted. Was not the best, for that
matter -- the best, that is, of little melancholy, middling,
disinherited Marr -- seated in every stiff chair of the decent old house
[296] and stitched into the patchwork of every quaint old counterpane?
Two hundred years of it squared themselves in the brown, panelled
parlour, creaked patiently on the wide staircase and bloomed
herbaceously in the red-walled garden. There was nothing any one had
ever done or been at Marr that a Frush hadn't done it or been it. Yet
they wanted more of a picture and talked themselves into the fancy of
it; there were portraits -- half a dozen, comparatively recent (they
called 1800 comparatively recent), and something of a trial to a
descendant who had copied Titian at the Pitti; but they were curious of
detail and would have liked to people a little more thickly their
backward space, to set it up behind their chairs as a screen embossed
with figures. They threw off theories and small imaginations, and almost
conceived themselves engaged in researches; all of which made for pomp
and circumstance. Their desire was to discover something, and,
emboldened by the broader sweep of wing of her companion, Miss Susan
herself was not afraid of discovering something bad. Miss Amy it was who
had first remarked, as a warning, that this was what it might all lead
to. It was she, moreover, to whom they owed the formula that, had
anything _very_ bad ever happened at Marr, they should be sorry if a
Frush hadn't been in it. This was the moment at which Miss Susan's
spirit had reached its highest point: she had declared, with her odd,
breathless laugh, a prolonged, an alarmed or alarming gasp, that she
should really be quite ashamed. And so they rested a while; not saying
quite how far they were prepared to go in crime -- not giving the matter
a name. But there would have been little doubt for an observer that each
supposed [297] the other to mean that she not only didn't draw the line
at murder, but stretched it so as to take in -- well, gay deception. If
Miss Susan could conceivably have asked whether Don Juan had ever
touched at that port, Miss Amy would, to a certainty, have wanted to
know by way of answer at what port he had _not_ touched. It was only
unfortunately true that no one of the portraits of gentlemen looked at
all like him and no one of those of ladies suggested one of his victims.
  At last, none the less, the cousins had a find, came upon a box of old
odds and ends, mainly documentary; partly printed matter, newspapers and
pamphlets yellow and grey with time, and, for the rest, epistolary --
several packets of letters, faded, scarce decipherable, but clearly
sorted for preservation and tied, with sprigged ribbon of a far-away
fashion, into little groups. Marr, below ground, is solidly founded --
underlaid with great straddling cellars, sound and dry, that are like
the groined crypts of churches and that present themselves to the meagre
modern conception as the treasure-chambers of stout merchants and
bankers in the old bustling days. A recess in the thickness of one of
the walls had yielded up, on resolute investigation -- that of the local
youth employed for odd jobs and who had happened to explore in this
direction on his own account -- a collection of rusty superfluities
among which the small chest in question had been dragged to light. It
produced of course an instant impression and figured as a discovery;
though indeed as rather a deceptive one on its having, when forced open,
nothing better to show, at the best, than a quantity of rather illegible
correspondence. [298] The good ladies had naturally had for the moment a
fluttered hope of old golden guineas -- a miser's hoard; perhaps even of
a hatful of those foreign coins of old-fashioned romance, ducats,
doubloons, pieces of eight, as are sometimes found to have come to
hiding, from over seas, in ancient ports. But they had to accept their
disappointment -- which they sought to do by making the best of the
papers, by agreeing, in other words, to regard them as wonderful. Well,
they _were_, doubtless, wonderful; which didn't prevent them, however,
from appearing to be, on superficial inspection, also rather a weary
labyrinth. Baffling, at any rate, to Miss Susan's unpractised eyes, the
little pale-ribboned packets were, for several evenings, round the fire,
while she luxuriously dozed, taken in hand by Miss Amy; with the result
that on a certain occasion when, toward nine o'clock, Miss Susan woke
up, she found her fellow-labourer fast asleep. A slightly irritated
confession of ignorance of the Gothic character was the further
consequence, and the upshot of this, in turn, was the idea of appeal to
Mr Patten. Mr Patten was the vicar and was known to interest himself, as
such, in the ancient annals of Marr; in addition to which -- and to its
being even held a little that his sense of the affairs of the hour was
sometimes sacrificed to such inquiries -- he was a gentleman with a
humour of his own, a flushed face, a bushy eyebrow and a black
wide-awake worn sociably askew. "He will tell us," said Amy Frush, "if
there's anything in them."
  "Yet if it should be," Susan suggested, "anything we mayn't like?"
  "Well, that's just what I'm thinking of," returned [299] Miss Amy in
her offhand way. "If it's anything we shouldn't know---"
  "We've only to tell him not to tell us? Oh, certainly," said mild Miss
Susan. She took upon herself even to give him that warning when, on the
invitation of our friends, Mr Patten came to tea and to talk things
over; Miss Amy sitting by and raising no protest, but distinctly
promising herself that, whatever there might be to be known, and however
objectionable, she would privately get it out of their initiator. She
found herself already hoping that it _would_ be something too bad for
her cousin -- too bad for any one else at all -- to know, and that it
most properly might remain between them. Mr Patten, at sight of the
papers, exclaimed, perhaps a trifle ambiguously, and by no means
clerically, "My eye, what a lark!" and retired, after three cups of tea,
in an overcoat bulging with his spoil.


                          -=-=-  2  -=-=-

  At ten o'clock that evening the pair separated, as usual, on the upper
landing, outside their respective doors, for the night; but Miss Amy had
hardly set down her candle on her dressing-table before she was startled
by an extraordinary sound, which appeared to proceed not only from her
companion's room, but from her companion's throat. It was something she
would have described, had she ever described it, as between a gurgle and
a shriek, and it brought Amy Frush, after an interval of stricken
stillness that gave her just time to say to herself "Some one under her
bed!" breathlessly and bravely [300] back to the landing. She had not
reached it, however, before her neighbour, bursting in, met her and
stayed her.
  "There's some one in my room!"
  They held each other. "But who?"
  "A man."
  "Under the bed?"
  "No -- just standing there."
  They continued to hold each other, but they rocked. "Standing? Where?
How?"
  "Why, right in the middle -- before my dressing-glass."
  Amy's blanched face by this time matched her mate's, but its terror
was enhanced by speculation. "To look at himself?"
  "No -- with his back to it. To look at _me_," poor Susan just audibly
breathed. "To keep me off," she quavered. "In strange clothes -- of
another age; with his head on one side."
  Amy wondered. "On one side?"
  "Awfully!" the refugee declared while, clinging together, they sounded
each other.
  This, somehow, for Miss Amy, was the convincing touch; and on it,
after a moment, she was capable of the effort of darting back to close
her own door. "You'll remain then with me."
  "Oh!" Miss Susan wailed with deep assent; quite, as if, had she been a
slangy person, she would have ejaculated 'Rather!' So they spent the
night together; with the assumption thus marked, from the first, both
that it would have been vain to confront their visitor as they didn't
even pretend to each other that they would have confronted a
house-breaker; and that by leaving the place at his mercy [301] nothing
worse could happen than had already happened. It was Miss Amy's
approaching the door again as with intent ear and after a hush that had
represented between them a deep and extraordinary interchange -- it was
this that put them promptly face to face with the real character of the
occurrence. "Ah," Miss Susan, still under her breath, portentously
exclaimed, "it isn't any one---!"
  "No" -- her partner was already able magnificently to take her up. "It
isn't any one---"
  "Who can really hurt us" -- Miss Susan completed her thought. And Miss
Amy, as it proved, had been so indescribably prepared that this thought,
before morning, had, in the strangest, finest way, made for itself an
admirable place with them. The person the elder of our pair had seen in
her room was not -- well, just simply was not any one in from outside.
He was a different thing altogether. Miss Amy had felt it as soon as she
heard her friend's cry and become aware of her commotion; as soon, at
all events, as she saw Miss Susan's face. That was all -- and there it
was. There had been something hitherto wanting, they felt, to their
small state and importance; it was present now, and they were as
handsomely conscious of it as if they had previously missed it. The
element in question, then, was a third person in their association, a
hovering presence for the dark hours, a figure that with its head very
much -- too much -- on one side, could be trusted to look at them out of
unnatural places; yet only, it doubtless might be assumed, to look at
them. They had it at last -- had what was to be had in an old house
where many, too many, things had happened, where the very walls they
touched and [302] floors they trod could have told secrets and named
names, where every surface was a blurred mirror of life and death, of
the endured, the remembered, the forgotten. Yes; the place was h------
but they stopped at sounding the word. And by morning, wonderful to say,
they were used to it -- had quite lived into it.
  Not only this indeed, but they had their prompt theory. There was a
connection between the finding of the box in the vault and the
appearance in Miss Susan's room. The heavy air of the past had been
stirred by the bringing to light of what had so long been hidden. The
communication of the papers to Mr Patten had had its effect. They faced
each other in the morning at breakfast over the certainty that their
queer roused inmate was the sign of the violated secret of these relics.
No matter; for the sake of the secret they would put up with his
attention; and -- this, in them, was most beautiful of all -- they must,
though he was such an addition to their grandeur, keep him quite to
themselves. Other people might hear of what was in the letters, but they
should never hear of _him_. They were not afraid that either of the
maids should see him -- he was not a matter for maids. The question
indeed was whether -- should he keep it up long -- they themselves would
find that they could really live with him. Yet perhaps his keeping it up
would be just what would make them indifferent. They turned these things
over, but spent the next nights together; and on the third day, in the
course of their afternoon walk, descried at a distance the vicar, who,
as soon as he saw them, waved his arms violently -- either as a warning
or as a joke -- and came [303] more than half-way to meet them. It was
in the middle -- or what passed for such -- of the big, bleak, blank,
melancholy square of Marr; a public place, as it were, of such an absurd
capacity for a crowd; with the great ivy-mantled choir and stopped
transept of the nobly-planned church telling of how many centuries ago
it had, for its part, given up growing.
  "Why, my dear ladies," cried Mr Patten as he approached, "do you know
what, of all things in the world, I seem to make out for you from your
funny old letters?" Then as they waited, extremely on their guard now:
"Neither more nor less, if you please, than that one of your ancestors
in the last century -- Mr Cuthbert Frush, it would seem, by name -- was
hanged."
  They never knew afterwards which of the two had first found composure
-- found even dignity -- to respond. "And pray, Mr Patten, for what?"
  "Ah, that's just what I don't yet get hold of. But if you don't mind
my digging away" -- and the vicar's bushy, jolly brows turned from one
of the ladies to the other -- "I think I can run it to earth. They
hanged, in those days, you know," he added as if he had seen something
in their faces, "for almost any trifle!"
  "Oh, I hope it wasn't for a trifle!" Miss Susan strangely tittered.
  "Yes, of course one would like that, while he was about it -- well, it
had been, as they say," Mr Patten laughed, "rather for a sheep than for
a lamb!"
  "Did they hang at that time for a sheep?" Miss Amy wonderingly asked.
  It made their friend laugh again. "The question's whether _he_ did!
But we'll find out. Upon my [304] word, you know, I quite want to
myself. I'm awfully busy, but I think I can promise you that you shall
hear. You _don't_ mind?" he insisted.
  "I think we could bear _anything_," said Miss Amy.
  Miss Susan gazed at her, on this, as for reference and appeal. "And
what is he, after all, at this time of day, _to_ us?"
  Her kinswoman, meeting the eyeglass fixedly, spoke with gravity. "Oh,
an ancestor's always an ancestor."
  "Well said and well felt, dear lady!" the vicar declared. "Whatever
they may have done---"
  "It isn't every one," Miss Amy replied, "that has them to be ashamed
of."
  "And we're not ashamed _yet_!" Miss Frush jerked out.
  "Let me promise you then that you shan't be. Only, for I am busy,"
said Mr Patten, "give me time."
  "Ah, but we want the truth!" they cried with high emphasis as he
quitted them. They were much excited now.
  He answered by pulling up and turning round as short as if his
professional character had been challenged. "Isn't it just in the truth
-- and the truth only -- that I deal?"
  This they recognised as much as his love of a joke, and so they were
left there together in the pleasant, if slightly overdone, void of the
square, which wore at moments the air of a conscious demonstration,
intended as an appeal, of the shrinkage of the population of Marr to a
solitary cat. They walked on after a little, but they waited till the
vicar was ever so far away before they spoke [305] again; all the more
that their doing so must bring them once more to a pause. Then they had
a long look. "Hanged!" said Miss Amy -- yet almost exultantly.
  This was, however, because it was not she who had seen. "That's why
his head---" but Miss Susan faltered.
  Her companion took it in. "Oh, has such a dreadful twist?"
  "It _is_ dreadful!" Miss Susan at last dropped, speaking as if she had
been present at twenty executions.
  There would have been no saying, at any rate, what it didn't evoke
from Miss Amy. "It breaks their neck," she contributed after a moment.
  Miss Susan looked away. "That's why, I suppose, the head turns so
fearfully awry. It's a most peculiar effect."
  So peculiar, it might have seemed, that it made them silent afresh.
"Well then, I hope he killed some one!" Miss Amy broke out at last.
  Her companion thought. "Wouldn't it depend on whom---?"
  "No!" she returned with her characteristic briskness -- a briskness
that set them again into motion.
  That Mr Patten was tremendously busy was evident indeed, as even by
the end of the week he had nothing more to impart. The whole thing
meanwhile came up again -- on the Sunday afternoon; as the younger Miss
Frush had been quite confident that, from one day to the other, it must.
They went inveterately to evening church, to the close of which supper
was postponed; and Miss Susan, on this occasion, ready the first,
patiently awaited her mate at the foot of the stairs. Miss [306] Amy at
last came down, buttoning a glove, rustling the tail of a frock and
looking, as her kinswoman always thought, conspicuously young and smart.
There was no one at Marr, she held, who dressed like her; and Miss Amy,
it must be owned, had also settled to this view of Miss Susan, though
taking it in a different spirit. Dusk had gathered, but our frugal pair
were always tardy lighters, and the grey close of day, in which the
elder lady, on a high-backed hall chair, sat with hands patiently
folded, had for all cheer the subdued glow -- always subdued -- of the
small fire in the drawing-room, visible through a door that stood open.
Into the drawing-room Miss Amy passed in search of the prayer-book she
had laid down there after morning church, and from it, after a minute,
without this volume, she returned to her companion. There was something
in her movement that spoke -- spoke for a moment so largely that nothing
more was said till, with a quick unanimity, they had got themselves
straight out of the house. There, before the door, in the cold, still
twilight of the winter's end, while the church bells rang and the
windows of the great choir showed across the empty square faintly red,
they had it out again. But it was Miss Susan herself, this time, who had
to bring it.
  "He's there?"
  "Before the fire -- with his back to it."
  "Well, now you see!" Miss Susan exclaimed with elation and as if her
friend had hitherto doubted her.
  "Yes, I see -- and what you mean." Miss Amy was deeply thoughtful.
  "About his head?"
  "It _is_ on one side," Miss Amy went on. "It makes [307] him---" she
considered. But she faltered as if still in his presence.
  "It makes him awful!" Miss Susan murmured. "The way," she softly
moaned, "he looks at you!"
  Miss Amy, with a glance, met this recognition. "Yes -- doesn't he?"
Then her eyes attached themselves to the red windows of the church. "But
it means something."
  "The Lord knows what it means!" her associate gloomily sighed. Then,
after an instant, "Did he move?" Miss Susan asked.
  "No -- and _I_ didn't."
  "Oh, I did!" Miss Susan declared, recalling to her more precipitous
retreat.
  "I mean I took my time. I waited."
  "To see him fade?"
  Miss Amy for a moment said nothing. "He doesn't fade. That's _it_."
  "Oh, then you did move!" her relative rejoined.
  Again for a little she was silent. "One _has_ to. But I don't know
what really happened. Of course I came back to you. What I mean is that
I took him thoroughly in. He's young," she added.
  "But he's _bad_!" said Miss Susan.
  "He's handsome!" Miss Amy brought out after a moment. And she showed
herself even prepared to continue: "Splendidly."
  "'Splendidly'! -- with his neck broken and with that terrible look?"
  "It's just the look that makes him so. It's the wonderful eyes. They
mean something," Amy Frush brooded.
  She spoke with a decision of which Susan presently betrayed the
effect. "And what do they mean?" [308]
  Her friend had stared again at the glimmering windows of St Thomas of
Canterbury. "That it's time we should get to church."


                          -=-=-  3  -=-=-

  The curate that evening did duty alone; but on the morrow the vicar
called and, as soon as he got into the room, let them again have it. "He
was hanged for smuggling!"
  They stood there before him almost cold in their surprise and
diffusing an air in which, somehow, this misdemeanour sounded out as the
coarsest of all. "_Smuggling_?" Miss Susan disappointedly echoed -- as
if it presented itself to the first chill of their apprehension that he
had then only been vulgar.
  "Ah, but they hanged for it freely, you know, and I was an idiot for
not having taken it, in his case, for granted. If a man swung,
hereabouts, it _was_ mostly for that. Don't you know it's on that we
stand here to-day, such as we are -- on the fact of what our bold, bad
forefathers were not afraid of? It's in the floors we walk on and under
the roofs that cover us. They smuggled so hard that they never had time
to do anything else; and if they broke a head not their own it was only
in the awkwardness of landing their brandy-kegs. I mean, dear ladies,"
good Mr Patten wound up, "no disrespect to _your_ forefathers when I
tell you that -- as I've rather been supposing that, like all the rest
of us, you were aware -- they conveniently lived by it."
  Miss Susan wondered -- visibly almost doubted. "Gentlefolks?" [309]
  "It was the gentlefolks who were the worst."
  "They must have been the bravest!" Miss Amy interjected. She had
listened to their visitor's free explanation with a rapid return of
colour. "And since if they lived by it they also died for it---"
  "There's nothing at all to be said against them? I quite agree with
you," the vicar laughed, "for all my cloth; and I even go so far as to
say, shocking as you may think me, that we owe them, in our shabby
little shrunken present, the sense of a bustling background, a sort of
undertone of romance. They give us" -- he humorously kept it up, verging
perilously near, for his cloth, upon positive paradox -- "our little
handful of legend and our small possibility of ghosts." He paused an
instant, with his lighter pulpit manner, but the ladies exchanged no
look. They were in fact already, with an immense revulsion, carried
quite as far away. "Every penny in the place, really, that hasn't been
earned by subtler -- not nobler -- arts in our own virtuous time, and
though it's a pity there are not more of 'em: every penny in the place
was picked up, somehow, by a clever trick, and at the risk of your neck,
when the backs of the king's officers were turned. It's shocking, you
know, what I'm saying to you, and I wouldn't say it to every one, but I
think of some of the shabby old things about us, that represent such
pickings, with a sort of sneaking kindness -- as of relics of our heroic
age. What are we now? We were at any rate devils of fellows then!"
  Susan Frush considered it all solemnly, struggling with the spell of
this evocation. "But must we forget that they were wicked?"
  "Never!" Mr Patten laughed. "Thank you, dear [310] friend, for
reminding me. Only I'm worse than they!"
  "But would you do it?"
  "Murder a coastguard---?" The vicar scratched his head.
  "I hope," said Miss Amy rather surprisingly, "you'd defend yourself."
And she gave Miss Susan a superior glance. "_I_ would!" she distinctly
added.
  Her companion anxiously took it up. "Would you defraud the revenue?"
  Miss Amy hesitated but a moment; then with a strange laugh, which she
covered, however, by turning instantly away, "Yes!" she remarkably
declared.
  Their visitor, at this, amused and amusing, eagerly seized her arm.
"Then may I count on you on the stroke of midnight to help me---?"
  "To help you---?"
  "To land the last new Tauchnitz."
  She met the proposal as one whose fancy had kindled, while her cousin
watched them as if they had suddenly improvised a drawing-room charade.
"A service of danger?"
  "Under the cliff -- when you see the lugger stand in!"
  "Armed to the teeth?"
  "Yes -- but invisibly. Your old waterproof---!"
  "Mine is new. I'll take Susan's!"
  This good lady, however, had her reserves. "Mayn't one of them, all
the same -- here and there -- have been sorry?"
  Mr Patten wondered. "For the jobs he muffed?"
  "For the wrong -- as it _was_ wrong -- he did."
  "'One' of them?" She had gone too far, for the vicar suddenly looked
as if he divined in the question a reference. [311]
  They became, however, as promptly unanimous in meeting this danger, as
to which Miss Susan in particular showed an inspired presence of mind.
"Two of them!" she sweetly smiled. "May not Amy and I---?"
  "Vicariously repent?" said Mr Patten. "That depends -- for the true
honour of Marr -- on how you show it."
   "Oh, we _sha'n't_ show it!" Miss Amy cried.
  "Ah, then," Mr Patten returned, "though atonements, to be efficient,
are supposed to be public, you may do penance in secret as much as you
please!"
   "Well, _I_ shall do it," said Susan Frush.
  Again, by something in her tone, the vicar's attention appeared to be
caught. "Have you then in view a particular form---?"
  "Of atonement?" She coloured now, glaring rather helplessly, in spite
of herself, at her companion. "Oh, if you're sincere you'll always find
one."
  Amy came to her assistance. "The way she often treats me has made her
-- though there's after all no harm in her -- familiar with remorse.
Mayn't we, at any rate," the younger lady continued, "now have our
letters back?" And the vicar left them with the assurance that they
should receive the bundle on the morrow.
  They were indeed so at one as to shrouding their mystery that no
explicit agreement, no exchange of vows, needed to pass between them;
they only settled down, from this moment, to an unshared possession of
their secret, an economy in the use and, as may even be said, the
enjoyment of it, that was part of their general instinct and habit of
thrift. It had been the disposition, the practice, the necessity [312]
of each to keep, fairly indeed to clutch, everything that, as they often
phrased it, came their way; and this was not the first time such an
influence had determined for them an affirmation of property in objects
to which ridicule, suspicion, or some other inconvenience, might attach.
It was their simple philosophy that one never knew of what service an
odd object might _not_ be; and there were days now on which they felt
themselves to have made a better bargain with their aunt's executors
than was witnessed in those law-papers which they had at first
timorously regarded as the record of advantages taken of them in matters
of detail. They had got, in short, more than was vulgarly, more than was
even shrewdly supposed -- such an indescribable unearned increment as
might scarce more be divulged as a dread than as a delight. They drew
together, old-maidishly, in a suspicious, invidious grasp of the idea
that a dread of their very own -- and blissfully not, of course, that of
a failure of any essential supply -- might, on nearer acquaintance,
positively turn to a delight.
  Upon some such attempted consideration of it, at all events, they
found themselves embarking after their last interview with Mr Patten, an
understanding conveyed between them in no redundancy of discussion, no
flippant repetitions nor profane recurrences, yet resting on a sense of
added margin, of appropriated history, of liberties taken with time and
space, that would leave them prepared both for the worst and for the
best. The best would be that something that would turn out to their
advantage might prove to be hidden about the place; the worst would be
that they might find themselves growing to depend only too much on
excitement. They [313] found themselves amazingly reconciled, on Mr
Patten's information, to the particular character thus fixed on their
visitor; they knew by tradition and fiction that even the highwaymen of
the same picturesque age were often gallant gentlemen; therefore a
smuggler, by such a measure, fairly belonged to the aristocracy of
crime. When their packet of documents came back from the vicarage Miss
Amy, to whom her associate continued to leave them, took them once more
in hand; but with an effect, afresh, of discouragement and languor -- a
headachy sense of faded ink, of strange spelling and crabbed characters,
of allusions she couldn't follow and parts she couldn't match. She
placed the tattered papers piously together, wrapping them tenderly in a
piece of old figured silken stuff; then, as solemnly as if they had been
archives or statutes or title-deeds, laid them away in one of the
several small cupboards lodged in the thickness of the wainscoted walls.
What really most sustained our friends in all ways was their
consciousness of having, after all -- and so contrariwise to what
appeared -- a man in the house. It removed them from that category of
the manless into which no lady really lapses till every issue is closed.
Their visitor was an issue -- at least to the imagination, and they
arrived finally, under provocation, at intensities of flutter in which
they felt themselves so compromised by his hoverings that they could
only consider with relief the fact of nobody's knowing.
  The real complication indeed at first was that for some weeks after
their talks with Mr Patten the hoverings quite ceased; a circumstance
that brought home to them in some degree a sense of indiscretion [314]
and indelicacy. They hadn't mentioned him, no; but they had come
perilously near it, and they had doubtless, at any rate, too recklessly
let in the light of old buried and sheltered things, old sorrows and
shames. They roamed about the house themselves at times, fitfully and
singly, when each supposed the other out or engaged; they paused and
fingered, like soundless apparitions, in corners, doorways, passages,
and sometimes suddenly met, in these experiments, with a suppressed
start and a mute confession. They talked of him practically never; but
each knew how the other thought -- all the more that it was (oh yes,
unmistakably!) in a manner different from her own. They were together,
none the less, in feeling, while, week after week, he failed again to
show, as if they had been guilty of blowing, with an effect of
sacrilege, on old gathered silvery ashes. It frankly came out for them
that, possessed as they so strangely, yet so ridiculously were, they
should be able to settle to nothing till their consciousness was yet
again confirmed. Whatever the subject of it might have for them of fear
or favour, profit or loss, he had taken the taste from everything else.
He had converted _them_ into wandering ghosts. At last, one day, with
nothing they could afterwards perceive to have determined it, the change
came -- came, as the previous splash in their stillness had come, by the
pale testimony of Miss Susan.
  She waited till after breakfast to speak of it -- or Miss Amy, rather,
waited to hear her; for she showed during the meal the face of
controlled commotion that her comrade already knew and that must, with
the game loyally played, serve as preface to a disclosure. The younger
of the friends really watched the elder, [315] over their tea and toast,
as if seeing her for the first time as possibly tortuous, suspecting in
her some intention of keeping back what had happened. What had happened
was that the image of the hanged man had reappeared in the night; yet
only after they had moved together to the drawing-room did Miss Amy
learn the facts.
  "I was beside the bed -- in that low chair; about" -- since Miss Amy
must know -- "to take off my right shoe. I had noticed nothing before,
and had had time partly to undress -- had got into my wrapper. So,
suddenly -- as I happened to look -- there he was. And there," said
Susan Frush, "he stayed."
  "But where do you mean?"
  "In the high-backed chair, the old flowered chintz 'ear-chair' beside
the chimney."
  "All night? -- and you in your wrapper?" Then as if this image almost
challenged her credulity, "Why didn't you go to bed?" Miss Amy inquired.
  "With a -- a person in the room?" her friend wonderfully asked; adding
after an instant as with positive pride: "I never broke the spell!"
  "And didn't freeze to death?"
  "Yes, almost. To say nothing of not having slept, I can assure you,
one wink. I shut my eyes for long stretches, but whenever I opened them
he was still there, and I never for a moment lost consciousness."
  Miss Amy gave a groan of conscientious sympathy. "So that you're
feeling now of course half dead."
  Her companion turned to the chimney-glass a wan, glazed eye. "I dare
say I _am_ looking impossible."
  Miss Amy, after an instant, found herself still conscientious. "You
are." Her own eyes strayed to [316] the glass, lingering there while she
lost herself in thought. "Really," she reflected with a certain dryness,
"if that's the kind of thing it's to be---!" there would seem, in a
word, to be no withstanding it for either. Why, she afterwards asked
herself in secret, should the restless spirit of a dead adventurer have
addressed itself, in its trouble, to such a person as her queer, quaint,
inefficient housemate? It was in _her_, she dumbly and somewhat sorely
argued, that an unappeased soul of the old race should show a
confidence. To this conviction she was the more directed by the sense
that Susan had, in relation to the preference shown, vain and foolish
complacencies. She had her idea of what, in their prodigious
predicament, should be, as she called it, 'done', and that was a
question that Amy from this time began to nurse the small aggression of
not so much as discussing with her. She had certainly, poor Miss Frush,
a new, an obscure reticence, and since she wouldn't speak first she
should have silence to her fill. Miss Amy, however, peopled the silence
with conjectural visions of her kinswoman's secret communion. Miss
Susan, it was true, showed nothing, on any particular occasion, more
than usual; but this was just a part of the very felicity that had begun
to harden and uplift her. Days and nights hereupon elapsed without
bringing felicity of any order to Amy Frush. If she had no emotions it
was, she suspected, because Susan had them all; and -- it would have
been preposterous had it not been pathetic -- she proceeded rapidly to
hug the opinion that Susan was selfish and even something of a sneak.
Politeness, between them, still reigned, but confidence had flown, and
its place was taken by [317] open ceremonies and confessed precautions.
Miss Susan looked blank but resigned; which maintained again,
unfortunately, her superior air and the presumption of her duplicity.
Her manner was of not knowing where her friend's shoe pinched; but it
might have been taken by a jaundiced eye for surprise at the challenge
of her monopoly. The unexpected resistance of her nerves was indeed a
wonder: was that then the result, even for a shaky old woman, of shocks
sufficiently repeated? Miss Amy brooded on the rich inference that, if
the first of them didn't prostrate and the rest didn't undermine, one
might keep them up as easily as -- well, say an unavowed acquaintance or
a private commerce of letters. She was startled at the comparison into
which she fell -- but what was this but an intrigue like another? And
fancy Susan carrying one on! That history of the long night hours of the
pair in the two chairs kept before her -- for it was always present --
the extraordinary measure. Was the situation it involved only grotesque
-- or was it quite grimly grand? It struck her as both; but that was the
case with all their situations. Would it be in herself, at any rate, to
show such a front? She put herself such questions till she was tired of
them. A few good moments of her own would have cleared the air. Luckily
they were to come.


                          -=-=-  4  -=-=-

  It was on a Sunday morning in April, a day brimming over with the turn
of the season. She had gone into the garden before church; they
cherished [318] alike, with pottering intimacies and opposed theories
and a wonderful apparatus of old gloves and trowels and spuds and little
botanical cards on sticks, this feature of their establishment, where
they could still differ without fear and agree without diplomacy, and
which now, with its vernal promise, threw beauty and gloom and light and
space, a great good-natured ease, into their wavering scales. She was
dressed for church; but when Susan, who had, from a window, seen her
wandering, stooping, examining, touching, appeared in the doorway to
signify a like readiness, she suddenly felt her intention checked.
"Thank you," she said, drawing near; "I think that, though I've dressed,
I won't, after all, go. Please therefore, proceed without me."
  Miss Susan fixed her. "You're not well?"
  "Not particularly. I shall be better -- the morning's so perfect --
here."
  "Are you really ill?"
  "Indisposed; but not enough so, thank you, for you to stay with me."
  "Then it has come on but just now?"
  "No -- I felt not quite fit when I dressed. But it won't do."
  "Yet you'll stay out here?"
  Miss Amy looked about. "It will depend!"
  Her friend paused long enough to have asked what it would depend on,
but abruptly, after this contemplation, turned instead and, merely
throwing over her shoulder an "At least take care of yourself!" went
rustling, in her stiffest Sunday fashion, about her business. Miss Amy,
left alone, as she clearly desired to be, lingered a while in the
garden, where the sense of things was somehow made still more [319]
delicious by the sweet, vain sounds from the church tower; but by the
end of ten minutes she had returned to the house. The sense of things
was not delicious there, for what it had at last come to was that, as
they thought of each other what they couldn't say, all their contacts
were hard and false. The real wrong was in what Susan thought -- as to
which she was much too proud and too sore to undeceive her. Miss Amy
went vaguely to the drawing-room.
  They sat as usual, after church, at their early Sunday dinner, face to
face; but little passed between them save that Miss Amy felt better,
that the curate had preached, that nobody else had stayed away, and that
everybody had asked why Amy had. Amy, hereupon, satisfied everybody by
feeling well enough to go in the afternoon; on which occasion, on the
other hand -- and for reasons even less luminous than those that had
operated with her mate in the morning -- Miss Susan remained within. Her
comrade came back late, having, after church, paid visits; and found
her, as daylight faded, seated in the drawing-room, placid and dressed,
but without so much as a Sunday book -- the place contained whole
shelves of such reading -- in her hand. She looked so as if a visitor
had just left her that Amy put the question: "Has any one called?"
  "Dear, no; I've been quite alone."
  This again was indirect, and it instantly determined for Miss Amy a
conviction -- a conviction that, on her also sitting down just as she
was and in a silence that prolonged itself, promoted in its turn another
determination. The April dusk gathered, and still, without further
speech, the companions sat there. But at last Miss Amy said [320] in a
tone not quite her commonest: "This morning he came -- while you were at
church. I suppose it must have been really -- though of course I
couldn't know it -- what I was moved to stay at home for." She spoke now
-- out of her contentment -- as if to oblige with explanations.
  But it was strange how Miss Susan met her. "You stay at home for him?
_I_ don't!" She fairly laughed at the triviality of the idea.
  Miss Amy was naturally struck by it and after an instant even nettled.
"Then why did you do so this afternoon?"
  "Oh, it wasn't for _that_!" Miss Susan lightly quavered. She made her
distinction. "I _really_ wasn't well."
  At this her cousin brought it out. "But he has been with you?"
  "My dear child," said Susan, launched unexpectedly even to herself,
"he's with me so often that if I put myself out for him---!" But as if
at sight of something that showed, through the twilight, in her friend's
face, she pulled herself up.
  Amy, however, spoke with studied stillness. "You've ceased then to put
yourself out? You gave me, you remember, an instance of how you once
did!" And she tried, on her side, a laugh.
  "Oh yes -- that was at first. But I've seen such a lot of him since.
Do you mean _you_ hadn't?" Susan asked. Then as her companion only sat
looking at her: "Has this been really the first time for you -- since we
last talked?"
  Miss Amy for a minute said nothing. "You've actually believed me---"
  "To be enjoying on your own account what _I_ [321] enjoy? How couldn't
I, at the very least," Miss Susan cried -- "so grand and strange as you
must allow me to say you've struck me?"
  Amy hesitated. "I hope I've sometimes struck you as decent!"
  But it was a touch that, in her friend's almost amused preoccupation
with the simple fact, happily fell short. "You've only been waiting for
what didn't come?"
  Miss Amy coloured in the dusk. "It came, as I tell you, to-day."
  "Better late than never!" And Miss Susan got up.
  Amy Frush sat looking. "It's because you thought you had ground for
jealousy that _you've_ been extraordinary?"
  Poor Susan, at this, quite bounced about. "Jealousy?"
  It was a tone -- never heard from her before -- that brought Amy Frush
to her feet; so that for a minute, in the unlighted room where, in
honour of the spring, there had been no fire and the evening chill had
gathered, they stood as enemies. It lasted, fortunately, even long
enough to give one of them time suddenly to find it horrible. "But why
should we quarrel _now_?" Amy broke out in a different voice.
  Susan was not too alienated quickly enough to meet it. "It _is_ rather
wretched."
  "Now when we're equal," Amy went on.
  "Yes -- I suppose we are." Then, however, as if just to attenuate the
admission, Susan had her last lapse from grace. "They say, you know,
that when women do quarrel it's usually about a man." [322]
  Amy recognised it, but also with a reserve. "Well then, let there
first _be_ one!"
  "And don't you call _him_---?"
  "No!" Amy declared and turned away, while her companion showed her a
vain wonder for what she could in that case have expected. Their
identity of privilege was thus established, but it is not certain that
the air with which she indicated that the subject had better drop didn't
press down for an instant her side of the balance. She knew that she
knew most about men.
  The subject did drop for the time, it being agreed between them that
neither should from that hour expect from the other any confession or
report. They would treat all occurrences now as not worth mentioning --
a course easy to pursue from the moment the suspicion of jealousy had,
on each side, been so completely laid to rest. They led their life a
month or two on the smooth ground of taking everything for granted; by
the end of which time, however, try as they would, they had set up no
question that -- while they met as a pair of gentlewomen living together
only must meet -- could successfully pretend to take the place of that
of Cuthbert Frush. The spring softened and deepened, reached out its
tender arms and scattered its shy graces; the earth broke, the air
stirred, with emanations that were as touches and voices of the past;
our friends bent their backs in their garden and their noses over its
symptoms; they opened their windows to the mildness and tracked it in
the lanes and by the hedges; yet the plant of conversation between them
markedly failed to renew itself with the rest. It was not indeed that
the mildness was not within them as well as without; [323] all asperity,
at least, had melted away; they were more than ever pleased with their
general acquisition, which, at the winter's end, seemed to give out more
of its old secrets, to hum, however faintly, with more of its old
echoes, to creak, here and there, with the expiring throb of old aches.
The deepest sweetness of the spring at Marr was just in its being in
this way an attestation of age and rest. The place never seemed to have
lived and lingered so long as when kind nature, like a maiden blessing a
crone, laid rosy hands on its grizzled head. Then the new season was a
light held up to show all the dignity of the years, but also all the
wrinkles and scars. The good ladies in whom we are interested changed,
at any rate, with the happy days, and it finally came out not only that
the invidious note had dropped, but that it had positively turned to
music. The whole tone of the time made so for tenderness that it really
seemed as if at moments they were sad for each other. They had their
grounds at last: each found them in her own consciousness; but it was as
if each waited, on the other hand, to be sure she could speak without
offence. Fortunately, at last, the tense cord snapped.
  The old churchyard at Marr is still liberal; it does its immemorial
utmost to people, with names and dates and memories and eulogies, with
generations fore-shortened and confounded, the high empty table at which
the grand old cripple of the church looks down over the low wall. It
serves as an easy thoroughfare, and the stranger finds himself pausing
in it with a sense of respect and compassion for the great maimed, ivied
shoulders -- as the image strikes him -- of stone. Miss Susan and Miss
Amy were strangers [324] enough still to have sunk down one May morning
on the sun-warmed tablet of an ancient tomb and to have remained looking
about them in a sort of anxious peace. Their walks were all pointless
now, as if they always stopped and turned, for an unconfessed want of
interest, before reaching their object. That object presented itself at
every start as the same to each, but they had come back too often
without having got near it. This morning, strangely, on the return and
almost in sight of their door, they were more in presence of it than
they had ever been, and they seemed fairly to touch it when Susan said
at last, quite in the air and with no traceable reference: "I hope you
don't mind, dearest, if I'm awfully sorry for you."
  "Oh, I know it," Amy returned -- "I've felt it. But what does it do
for us?" she asked.
  Then Susan saw, with wonder and pity, how little resentment for
penetration or patronage she had had to fear and out of what a depth of
sentiment similar to her own her companion helplessly spoke. "You're
sorry for _me_?"
  Amy at first only looked at her with tired eyes, putting out a hand
that remained a while on her arm. "Dear old girl! You might have told me
before," she went on as she took everything in; "though, after all,
haven't we each really known it?"
  "Well," said Susan, "we've waited. We could only wait."
  "Then if we've waited together," her friend returned, "that _has_
helped us."
  "Yes -- to keep him in his place. Who would ever believe in him?" Miss
Susan wearily wondered. "If it wasn't for you and for me---" [325]
  "Not doubting of each other?" -- her companion took her up: "yes,
there wouldn't be a creature. It's lucky for us," said Miss Amy, "that
we _don't_ doubt."
  "Oh, if we did we shouldn't be sorry."
  "No -- except, selfishly, for ourselves. I am, I assure you, for _my_
self -- it has made me older. But, luckily, at any rate, we trust each
other."
  "We do," said Miss Susan.
  "We do," Miss Amy repeated -- they lingered a little on that. "But
except making one feel older, what has it done for one?"
  "There it is!"
  "And though we've kept him in his place," Miss Amy continued, "he has
also kept us in ours. We've lived with it," she declared in melancholy
justice. "And we wondered at first if we could!" she ironically added.
"Well, isn't just what we feel now that we can't any longer?"
  "No -- it must stop. And I've my idea," said Susan Frush.
  "Oh, I assure you I've mine!" her cousin responded.
  "Then if you want to act, don't mind me."
  "Because you certainly won't _me_? No, I suppose not. Well!" Amy
sighed, as if, merely from this, relief had at last come. Her comrade
echoed it; they remained side by side; and nothing could have had more
oddity than what was assumed alike in what they had said and in what
they still kept back. There would have been this at least in their
favour for a questioner of their case, that each, charged dejectedly
with her own experience, took, on the part of the other, the
extraordinary -- the ineffable, in fact -- all for granted. They never
named it again -- as indeed it was not easy to name; the whole [326]
matter shrouded itself in personal discriminations and privacies; the
comparison of notes had become a thing impossible. What was definite was
that they had lived into their queer story, passed through it as through
an observed, a studied, eclipse of the usual, a period of reclusion, a
financial, social or moral crisis, and only desired now to live out of
it again. The questioner we have been supposing might even have fancied
that each, on her side, had hoped for something from it that she finally
perceived it was never to give, which would have been exactly, moreover,
the core of her secret and the explanation of her reserve. They at
least, as the business stood, put each other to no test, and, if they
were in fact disillusioned and disappointed, came together, after their
long blight, solidly on that. It fully appeared between them that they
felt a great deal older. When they got up from their sun-warmed slab,
however, reminding each other of luncheon, it was with a visible
increase of ease and with Miss Susan's hand drawn, for the walk home,
into Miss Amy's arm. Thus the 'idea' of each had continued unspoken and
ungrudged. It was as if each wished the other to try her own first; from
which it might have been gathered that they alike presented difficulty
and even entailed expense. The great questions remained. What then did
he mean? what then did he want? Absolution, peace, rest, his final
reprieve -- merely to say _that_ saw them no further on the way than
they had already come. What were they at last to do for him? What could
they give him that he would take? The ideas they respectively nursed
still bore no fruit, and at the end of another month Miss Susan was
frankly anxious about Miss Amy. [327] Miss Amy as freely admitted that
people _must_ have begun to notice strange marks in them and to look for
reasons. They were changed -- they must change back.


                          -=-=-  5  -=-=-

  Yet it was not till one morning at midsummer, on their meeting for
breakfast, that the elder lady fairly attacked the younger's last
entrenchment. "Poor, poor Susan!" Miss Amy had said to herself as her
cousin came into the room; and a moment later she brought out, for very
pity, her appeal. "When then _is_ yours?"
  "My idea?" It was clearly, at last, a vague comfort to Miss Susan to
be asked. Yet her answer was desolate. "Oh, it's no use!"
  "But how do you know?"
  "Why, I tried it -- ten days ago, and I thought at first it had
answered. But it hasn't."
  "He's back again?"
  Wan, tired, Miss Susan gave it up. "Back again."
  Miss Amy, after one of the long, odd looks that had now become their
most frequent form of intercourse, thought it over. "And just the same?"
  "Worse."
  "Dear!" said Miss Amy, clearly knowing what that meant. "Then what did
you do?"
  Her friend brought it roundly out. "I made my sacrifice."
  Miss Amy, though still more deeply interrogative, hesitated. "But of
what?"
  "Why, of my little all -- or almost." [328]
  The 'almost' seemed to puzzle Miss Amy, who, moreover, had plainly no
clue to the property or attribute so described. "Your 'little all'?"
  "Twenty pounds."
  "Money?" Miss Amy gasped.
  Her tone produced on her companion's part a wonder as great as her
own. "What then is it yours to give?"
  "My idea? It's not to _give_!" cried Amy Frush.
  At the finer pride that broke out in this poor Susan's blankness
flushed. "What then is it to do?"
  But Miss Amy's bewilderment outlasted her reproach. "Do you mean he
takes money?"
  "The Chancellor of the Exchequer does -- for 'conscience'."
  Her friend's exploit shone larger. "Conscience-money? You sent it to
Government?" Then while, as the effect of her surprise, her mate looked
too much a fool, Amy melted to kindness. "Why, you secretive old thing!"
  Miss Susan presently pulled herself more together. "When your ancestor
has robbed the revenue and his spirit walks for remorse---"
  "You pay to get rid of him? I see -- and it becomes what the vicar
called his atonement by deputy. But what if it isn't remorse?" Miss Amy
shrewdly asked.
  "But it _is_ -- or it seemed to me so."
  "Never to me," said Miss Amy.
  Again they searched each other. "Then, evidently, with you he's
different."
  Miss Amy looked away. "I dare say!"
  "So what _is_ your idea?"
  Miss Amy thought. "I'll tell you only if it works.' [329]
  "Then, for God's sake, try it!"
  Miss Amy, still with averted eyes and now looking easily wise,
continued to think. "To try it I shall have to leave you. That's why
I've waited so long." Then she fully turned, and with expression: "Can
you face three days alone?" 
  "Oh -- 'alone'! I wish I ever were!"
  At this her friend, as for very compassion, kissed her; for it seemed
really to have come out at last -- and welcome! -- that poor Susan was
the worse beset. "I'll do it! But I must go up to town. Ask me no
questions. All I can tell you now is---"
  "Well?" Susan appealed while Amy impressively fixed her.
  "It's no more remorse than _I'm_ a smuggler."
  "What is it then?"
  "It's bravado."
  An "Oh!" more shocked and scared than any that, in the whole business,
had yet dropped from her, wound up poor Susan's share in this agreement,
appearing as it did to represent for her a somewhat lurid inference.
Amy, clearly, had lights of her own. It was by their aid, accordingly,
that she immediately prepared for the first separation they had had yet
to suffer; of which the consequence, two days later, was that Miss
Susan, bowed and anxious, crept singly, on the return from their
parting, up the steep hill that leads from the station of Marr and
passed ruefully under the ruined town-gate, one of the old defences,
that arches over it.
  But the full sequel was not for a month -- one hot August night when,
under the dim stars, they sat together in their little walled garden.
Though they had by this time, in general, found again -- as women [330]
only can find -- the secret of easy speech, nothing, for the half-hour,
had passed between them: Susan had only sat waiting for her comrade to
wake up. Miss Amy had taken of late to interminable dozing -- as if with
forfeits and arrears to recover; she might have been a convalescent from
fever repairing tissue and getting through time. Susan Frush watched her
in the warm dimness, and the question between them was fortunately at
last so simple that she had freedom to think her pretty in slumber and
to fear that she herself, so unguarded, presented an appearance less
graceful. She was impatient, for her need had at last come, but she
waited, and while she waited she thought. She had already often done so,
but the mystery deepened to-night in the story told, as it seemed to
her, by her companion's frequent relapses. What had been, three weeks
before, the effort intense enough to leave behind such a trail of
fatigue? The marks, sure enough, had shown in the poor girl that morning
of the termination of the arranged absence for which not three days, but
ten, without word or sign, were to prove no more than sufficient. It was
at an unnatural hour that Amy had turned up, dusty, dishevelled,
inscrutable, confessing for the time to nothing more than a long
night-journey. Miss Susan prided herself on having played the game and
respected, however tormenting, the conditions. She had her conviction
that her friend had been out of the country, and she marvelled, thinking
of her own old wanderings and her present settled fears, at the spirit
with which a person who, whatever she had previously done, had not
travelled, could carry off such a flight. The hour had come at last for
this person to name her remedy. What determined it [331] was that, as
Susan Frush sat there, she took home the fact that the remedy was by
this time not to be questioned. It had acted as her own had not, and
Amy, to all appearance, had only waited for her to admit it. Well, she
was ready when Amy woke -- woke immediately to meet her eyes and to
show, after a moment, in doing so, a vision of what was in her mind.
"What _was_ it now?" Susan finally said.
  "My idea? Is it possible you've not guessed?"
  "Oh, you're deeper, much deeper," Susan sighed, "than I."
  Amy didn't contradict that -- seemed indeed, placidly enough, to take
it for truth; but she presently spoke as if the difference, after all,
didn't matter now. "Happily for us to-day -- isn't it so? -- our case is
the same. I can speak, at any rate, for myself. He has left me."
  "Thank God then!" Miss Susan devoutly murmured. "For he has left
_me_."
  "Are you sure?"
  "Oh, I think so."
  "But how?"
  "Well," said Miss Susan after an hesitation, "how are _you_?"
  Amy, for a little, matched her pause. "Ah, that's what I can't tell
you. I can only answer for it that he's gone."
  "Then allow me also to prefer not to explain. The sense of relief has
for some reason grown strong in me during the last half-hour. That's
such a comfort that it's enough, isn't it?"
  "Oh, plenty!" The garden-side of their old house, a window or two
dimly lighted, massed itself darkly in the summer night, and, with a
common impulse, [332] they gave it, across the little lawn, a long, fond
look. Yes, they could be sure. "Plenty!" Amy repeated. "He's gone."
  Susan's elder eyes hovered, in the same way, through her elegant
glass, at his purified haunt. "He's gone. And how," she insisted, "_did_
you do it?"
  "Why, you dear goose" -- Miss Amy spoke a little strangely -- "I went
to Paris."
  "To Paris?"
  "To see what I could bring back -- that I mightn't, that I shouldn't.
To do a stroke with!" Miss Amy brought out.
  But it left her friend still vague. "A stroke---?"
  "To get through the Customs -- under their nose."
  It was only with this that, for Miss Susan, a pale light dawned. "You
wanted to smuggle? _That_ was your idea?"
  "It was _his_," said Miss Amy. "He wanted no 'conscience money' spent
for him," she now more bravely laughed: "it was quite the other way
about -- he wanted some bold deed done, of the old wild kind; he wanted
some big risk taken. And I took it." She sprang up, rebounding, in her
triumph.
  Her companion, gasping, gazed at her. "Might they have hanged you
too?"
  Miss Amy looked up at the dim stars. "If I had defended myself. But
luckily it didn't come to that. What I brought in I brought" -- she rang
out, more and more lucid, now, as she talked -- "triumphantly. To
appease him -- I braved them. I chanced it, at Dover, and they never
knew."
  "Then you hid it---?"
  "About my person." [333]
  With the shiver of this Miss Susan got up, and they stood there
duskily together. "It was so small?" the elder lady wonderingly
murmured.
  "It was big enough to have satisfied him," her mate replied with just
a shade of sharpness. "I chose it, with much thought, from the forbidden
list."
  The forbidden list hung a moment in Miss Susan's eyes, suggesting to
her, however, but a pale conjecture. "A Tauchnitz?"
  Miss Amy communed again with the August stars. "It was the _spirit_ of
the deed that told."
  "A Tauchnitz" her friend insisted.
  Then at last her eyes again dropped, and the Misses Frush moved
together to the house. "Well, he's satisfied."
  "Yes, and" -- Miss Susan mused a little ruefully as they went -- "you
got at last your week in Paris!"
