We talked of London, face to face with a great bristling, primeval
glacier. The hour and the scene were one of those impressions which make
up a little, in Switzerland, for the modern indignity of travel -- the
promiscuities and vulgarities, the station and the hotel, the gregarious
patience, the struggle for a scrappy attention, the reduction to a
numbered state. The high valley was pink with the mountain rose, the
cool air as fresh as if the world were young. There was a faint flush of
afternoon on undiminished snows, and the fraternizing tinkle of the
unseen cattle came to us with a cropped and sun-warmed odour. The
balconied inn stood on the very neck of the sweetest pass in the
Oberland, and for a week we had had company and weather. This was felt
to be great luck, for one would have made up for the other had either
been bad.
  The weather certainly would have made up for the company; but it was
not subjected to this tax, for we had by a happy chance the _fleur des
pois_: [4] Lord and Lady Mellifont, Clare Vawdrey, the greatest (in the
opinion of many) of our literary glories, and Blanche Adney, the
greatest (in the opinion of all) of our theatrical. I mention these
first, because they were just the people whom in London, at that time,
people tried to 'get'. People endeavoured to 'book' them six weeks
ahead, yet on this occasion we had come in for them, we had all come in
for each other, without the least wire-pulling. A turn of the game had
pitched us together, the last of August, and we recognized our luck by
remaining so, under protection of the barometer. When the golden days
were over -- that would come soon enough -- we should wind down opposite
sides of the pass and disappear over the crest of surrounding heights.
We were of the same general communion, we participated in the same
miscellaneous publicity. We met, in London, with irregular frequency; we
were more or less governed by the laws and the language, the traditions
and the shibboleths of the same dense social state. I think all of us,
even the ladies, 'did' something, though we pretended we didn't when it
was mentioned. Such things are not mentioned indeed in London, but it
was our innocent pleasure to be different here. There had to be some way
to show the difference, inasmuch as we were under the impression that
this was our annual holiday. We felt at any rate that the conditions
were more human than in London, or that at least we ourselves were. We
were frank about this, we talked about it: it was what we were [5]
talking about as we looked at the flushing glacier, just as some one
called attention to the prolonged absence of Lord Mellifont and Mrs
Adney. We were seated on the terrace of the inn, where there were
benches and little tables, and those of us who were most bent on proving
that we had returned to nature were, in the queer Germanic fashion,
having coffee before meat.
  The remark about the absence of our two companions was not taken up,
not even by Lady Mellifont, not even by little Adney, the fond composer;
for it had been dropped only in the briefest intermission of Clare
Vawdrey's talk. (This celebrity was 'Clarence' only on the title-page.)
It was just that revelation of our being after all human that was his
theme. He asked the company whether, candidly, every one hadn't been
tempted to say to every one else: 'I had no idea you were really so
nice.' I had had, for my part, an idea that _he_ was, and even a good
deal nicer, but that was too complicated to go into then; besides it is
exactly my story. There was a general understanding among us that when
Vawdrey talked we should be silent, and not, oddly enough, because he at
all expected it. He didn't, for of all abundant talkers he was the most
unconscious, the least greedy and professional. It was rather the
religion of the host, of the hostess, that prevailed among us: it was
their own idea, but they always looked for a listening circle when the
great novelist dined with them. On the occasion I allude to [6] there
was probably no one present with whom, in London, he had not dined, and
we felt the force of this habit. He had dined even with me; and on the
evening of that dinner, as on this Alpine afternoon, I had been at no
pains to hold my tongue, absorbed as I inveterately was in a study of
the question which always rose before me, to such a height, in his fair,
square, strong stature.
  This question was all the more tormenting that he never suspected
himself (I am sure) of imposing it, any more than he had ever observed
that every day of his life every one listened to him at dinner. He used
to be called 'subjective' in the weekly papers, but in society no
distinguished man could have been less so. He never talked about
himself; and this was a topic on which, though it would have been
tremendously worthy of him, he apparently never even reflected. He had
his hours and his habits, his tailor and his hatter, his hygiene and his
particular wine, but all these things together never made up an
attitude. Yet they constituted the only attitude he ever adopted, and it
was easy for him to refer to our being 'nicer' abroad than at home. _He_
was exempt from variations, and not a shade either less or more nice in
one place than in another. He differed from other people, but never from
himself (save in the extraordinary sense which I will presently
explain), and struck me as having neither moods nor sensibilities nor
preferences. He might have been always in the same company, so far as he
recognized any [7] influence from age or condition or sex: he addressed
himself to women exactly as he addressed himself to men, and gossiped
with all men alike, talking no better to clever folk than to dull. I
used to feel a despair at his way of liking one subject -- so far as I
could tell -- precisely as much as another: there were some I hated so
myself. I never found him anything but loud and cheerful and copious,
and I never heard him utter a paradox or express a shade or play with an
idea. That fancy about our being 'human' was, in his conversation, quite
an exceptional flight. His opinions were sound and second-rate, and of
his perceptions it was too mystifying to think. I envied him his
magnificent health.
  Vawdrey had marched, with his even pace and his perfectly good
conscience, into the flat country of anecdote, where stories are visible
from afar like windmills and signposts; but I observed after a little
that Lady Mellifont's attention wandered. I happened to be sitting next
her. I noticed that her eyes rambled a little anxiously over the lower
slopes of the mountains. At last, after looking at her watch, she said
to me: "Do you know where they went?"
  "Do you mean Mrs Adney and Lord Mellifont?"
  "Lord Mellifont and Mrs Adney." Her ladyship's speech seemed --
unconsciously indeed -- to correct me, but it didn't occur to me that
this was because she was jealous. I imputed to her [8] no such vulgar
sentiment: in the first place, because I liked her, and in the second
because it would always occur to one quickly that it was right, in any
connection, to put Lord Mellifont first. He _was_ first --
extraordinarily first. I don't say greatest or wisest or most renowned,
but essentially at the top of the list and the head of the table. That
is a position by itself, and his wife was naturally accustomed to see
him in it. My phrase had sounded as if Mrs Adney had taken him; but it
was not possible for him to be taken -- he only took. No one, in the
nature of things, could know this better than Lady Mellifont. I had
originally been rather afraid of her, thinking her, with her stiff
silences and the extreme blackness of almost everything that made up her
person, somewhat hard, even a little saturnine. Her paleness seemed
slightly grey, and her glossy black hair metallic, like the brooches and
bands and combs with which it was inveterately adorned. She was in
perpetual mourning, and wore numberless ornaments of jet and onyx, a
thousand clicking chains and bugles and beads. I had heard Mrs Adney
call her the queen of night, and the term was descriptive if you
understood that the night was cloudy. She had a secret, and if you
didn't find it out as you knew her better you at least perceived that
she was gentle and unaffected and limited, and also rather submissively
sad. She was like a woman with a painless malady. I told her that I had
merely seen her husband and his companion [9] stroll down the glen
together about an hour before, and suggested that Mr Adney would perhaps
know something of their intentions.
  Vincent Adney, who, though he was fifty years old, looked like a good
little boy on whom it had been impressed that children should not talk
before company, acquitted himself with remarkable simplicity and taste
of the position of husband of a great exponent of comedy. When all was
said about her making it easy for him, one couldn't help admiring the
charmed affection with which he took everything for granted. It is
difficult for a husband who is not on the stage, or at least in the
theatre, to be graceful about a wife who is; but Adney was more than
graceful -- he was exquisite, he was inspired. He set his beloved to
music; and you remember how genuine his music could be -- the only
English compositions I ever saw a foreigner take an interest in. His
wife was in them, somewhere, always; they were like a free, rich
translation of the impression she produced. She seemed, as one listened,
to pass laughing, with loosened hair, across the scene. He had been only
a little fiddler at her theatre, always in his place during the acts;
but she had made him something rare and misunderstood. Their superiority
had become a kind of partnership, and their happiness was a part of the
happiness of their friends. Adney's one discomfort was that he couldn't
write a play for his wife, and the only way he meddled with her affairs
was by asking impossible people if _they_ couldn't. [10]
  Lady Mellifont, after looking across at him a moment, remarked to me
that she would rather not put any question to him. She added the next
minute: "I had rather people shouldn't see I'm nervous."
  "_Are_ you nervous?"
  "I always become so if my husband is away from me for any time."
  "Do you imagine something has happened to him?"
  "Yes, always. Of course I'm used to it."
  "Do you mean his tumbling over precipices -- that sort of thing?"
  "I don't know exactly what it is: it's the general sense that he'll
never come back."
  She said so much and kept back so much that the only way to treat the
condition she referred to seemed the jocular. "Surely he'll never
forsake you!" I laughed.
  She looked at the ground a moment. "Oh, at bottom I'm easy."
  "Nothing can ever happen to a man so accomplished, so infallible, so
armed at all points," I went on, encouragingly.
  "Oh, you don't know how he's armed!" she exclaimed, with such an odd
quaver that I could account for it only by her being nervous. This idea
was confirmed by her moving just afterwards, changing her seat rather
pointlessly, not as if to cut our conversation short, but because she
was in a fidget. I couldn't know what was the matter [11] with her, but
I was presently relieved to see Mrs Adney come toward us. She had in her
hand a big bunch of wild flowers, but she was not closely attended by
Lord Mellifont. I quickly saw, however, that she had no disaster to
announce; yet as I knew there was a question Lady Mellifont would like
to hear answered, but did not wish to ask, I expressed to her
immediately the hope that his lordship had not remained in a crevasse.
  "Oh, no; he left me but three minutes ago. He has gone into the
house." Blanche Adney rested her eyes on mine an instant -- a mode of
intercourse to which no man, for himself, could ever object. The
interest, on this occasion, was quickened by the particular thing the
eyes happened to say. What they usually said was only: 'Oh, yes, I'm
charming, I know, but don't make a fuss about it. I only want a new part
-- I do, I do!' At present they added, dimly, surreptitiously, and of
course sweetly -- for that was the way they did everything: 'It's all
right, but something did happen. Perhaps I'll tell you later.' She
turned to Lady Mellifont, and the transition to simple gaiety suggested
her mastery of her profession. "I've brought him safe. We had a charming
walk."
  "I'm so very glad," returned Lady Mellifont, with her faint smile;
continuing vaguely, as she got up: "He must have gone to dress for
dinner. Isn't it rather near?" She moved away, to the hotel, in her
leave-taking, simplifying fashion, and the rest of us, at the mention of
dinner, looked [12] at each other's watches, as if to shift the
responsibility of such grossness. The head-waiter, essentially, like all
head-waiters, a man of the world, allowed us hours and places of our
own, so that in the evening, apart under the lamp, we formed a compact,
an indulged little circle. But it was only the Mellifonts who 'dressed'
and as to whom it was recognized that they naturally _would_ dress: she
in exactly the same manner as on any other evening of her ceremonious
existence (she was not a woman whose habits could take account of
anything so mutable as fitness); and he, on the other hand, with
remarkable adjustment and suitability. He was almost as much a man of
the world as the head-waiter, and spoke almost as many languages; but he
abstained from courting a comparison of dress-coats and white
waistcoats, analyzing the occasion in a much finer way -- into black
velvet and blue velvet and brown velvet, for instance, into delicate
harmonies of necktie and subtle informalities of shirt. He had a costume
for every function and a moral for every costume; and his functions and
costumes and morals were ever a part of the amusement of life -- a part
at any rate of its beauty and romance -- for an immense circle of
spectators. For his particular friends indeed these things were more
than an amusement; they were a topic, a social support and of course, in
addition, a subject of perpetual suspense. If his wife had not been
present before dinner they were what the rest of us probably would have
been putting our heads together about. [13]
  Clare Vawdrey had a fund of anecdote on the whole question: he had
known Lord Mellifont almost from the beginning. It was a peculiarity of
this nobleman that there could be no conversation about him that didn't
instantly take the form of anecdote, and a still further distinction
that there could apparently be no anecdote that was not on the whole to
his honour. If he had come into a room at any moment, people might have
said frankly: 'Of course we were telling stories about you!' As
consciences go, in London, the general conscience would have been good.
Moreover it would have been impossible to imagine his taking such a
tribute otherwise than amiably, for he was always as unperturbed as an
actor with the right cue. He had never in his life needed the prompter
-- his very embarrassments had been rehearsed. For myself, when he was
talked about I always had an odd impression that we were speaking of the
dead -- it was with that peculiar accumulation of relish. His reputation
was a kind of gilded obelisk, as if he had been buried beneath it; the
body of legend and reminiscence of which he was to be the subject had
crystallized in advance.
  This ambiguity sprang, I suppose, from the fact that the mere sound of
his name and air of his person, the general expectation he created,
were, somehow, too exalted to be verified. The experience of his
urbanity always came later; the prefigurement, the legend paled before
the reality. I remember that on the evening I refer to the reality was
particularly [14] operative. The handsomest man of his period could
never have looked better, and he sat among us like a bland conductor
controlling by an harmonious play of arm an orchestra still a little
rough. He directed the conversation by gestures as irresistible as they
were vague; one felt as if without him it wouldn't have had anything to
call a tone. This was essentially what he contributed to any occasion --
what he contributed above all to English public life. He pervaded it, he
coloured it, he embellished it, and without him it would scarcely have
had a vocabulary. Certainly it would not have had a style; for a style
was what it had in having Lord Mellifont. He _was_ a style. I was
freshly struck with it as, in the _salle `a manger_ of the little Swiss
inn, we resigned ourselves to inevitable veal. Confronted with his form
(I must parenthesize that it was not confronted much), Clare Vawdrey's
talk suggested the reporter contrasted with the bard. It was interesting
to watch the shock of characters from which, of an evening, so much
would be expected. There was however no concussion -- it was all muffled
and minimized in Lord Mellifont's tact. It was rudimentary with him to
find the solution of such a problem in playing the host, assuming
responsibilities which carried with them their sacrifice. He had indeed
never been a guest in his life; he was the host, the patron, the
moderator at every board. If there was a defect in his manner (and I
suggest it under my breath), it was that he had a little more art than
any conjunction -- even the most complicated [15] -- could possibly
require. At any rate one made one's reflections in noticing how the
accomplished peer handled the situation and how the sturdy man of
letters was unconscious that the situation (and least of all he himself
as part of it), was handled. Lord Mellifont poured forth treasures of
tact, and Clare Vawdrey never dreamed he was doing it.
  Vawdrey had no suspicion of any such precaution even when Blanche
Adney asked him if he saw yet their third act -- an inquiry into which
she introduced a subtlety of her own. She had a theory that he was to
write her a play and that the heroine, if he would only do his duty,
would be the part for which she had immemorially longed. She was forty
years old (this could be no secret to those who had admired her from the
first), and she could now reach out her hand and touch her uttermost
goal. This gave a kind of tragic passion -- perfect actress of comedy as
she was -- to her desire not to miss the great thing. The years had
passed, and still she had missed it; none of the things she had done was
the thing she had dreamed of, so that at present there was no more time
to lose. This was the canker in the rose, the ache beneath the smile. It
made her touching -- made her sadness even sweeter than her laughter.
She had done the old English and the new French, and had charmed her
generation; but she was haunted by the vision of a bigger chance, of
something truer to the conditions that lay near her. She was tired of
Sheridan and she [16] hated Bowdler; she called for a canvas of a finer
grain. The worst of it, to my sense, was that she would never extract
her modern comedy from the great mature novelist, who was as incapable
of producing it as he was of threading a needle. She coddled him, she
talked to him, she made love to him, as she frankly proclaimed; but she
dwelt in illusions -- she would have to live and die with Bowdler.
  It is difficult to be cursory over this charming woman, who was
beautiful without beauty and complete with a dozen deficiencies. The
perspective of the stage made her over, and in society she was like the
model off the pedestal. She was the picture walking about, which to the
artless social mind was a perpetual surprise -- a miracle. People
thought she told them the secrets of the pictorial nature, in return for
which they gave her relaxation and tea. She told them nothing and she
drank the tea; but they had, all the same, the best of the bargain.
Vawdrey was really at work on a play; but if he had begun it because he
liked her I think he let it drag for the same reason. He secretly felt
the atrocious difficulty -- knew that from his hand the finished piece
would have received no active life. At the same time nothing could be
more agreeable than to have such a question open with Blanche Adney, and
from time to time he put something very good into the play. If he
deceived Mrs Adney it was only because in her despair she was determined
to be deceived. To her question about their third act he [17] replied
that, before dinner, he had written a magnificent passage.
  "Before dinner?" I said. "Why, _cher ma^itre_, before dinner you were
holding us all spellbound on the terrace."
  My words were a joke, because I thought his had been; but for the
first time that I could remember I perceived a certain confusion in his
face. He looked at me hard, throwing back his head quickly, the least
bit like a horse who has been pulled up short. "Oh, it was before that,"
he replied, naturally enough.
  "Before that you were playing billiards with _me_," Lord Mellifont
intimated.
  "Then it must have been yesterday," said Vawdrey.
  But he was in a tight place. "You told me this morning you did nothing
yesterday," the actress objected.
  "I don't think I really know when I do things." Vawdrey looked
vaguely, without helping himself, at a dish that was offered him.
  "It's enough if _we_ know," smiled Lord Mellifont.
  "I don't believe you've written a line," said Blanche Adney.
  "I think I could repeat you the scene." Vawdrey helped himself to
_haricots verts_.
  "Oh, do -- oh, do!" two or three of us cried.
  "After dinner, in the salon; it will be an immense _r'egal_," Lord
Mellifont declared.
  "I'm not sure, but I'll try," Vawdrey went on. [18]
  "Oh, you lovely man!" exclaimed the actress, who was practising
Americanisms, being resigned even to an American comedy.
  "But there must be this condition," said Vawdrey: "you must make your
husband play."
  "Play while you're reading? Never!"
  "I've too much vanity," said Adney.
  Lord Mellifont distinguished him. "You must give us the overture,
before the curtain rises. That's a peculiarly delightful moment."
  "I sha'n't read -- I shall just speak," said Vawdrey.
  "Better still, let me go and get your manuscript," the actress
suggested.
  Vawdrey replied that the manuscript didn't matter; but an hour later,
in the salon, we wished he might have had it. We sat expectant, still
under the spell of Adney's violin. His wife, in the foreground, on an
ottoman, was all impatience and profile, and Lord Mellifont, in the
chair -- it was always _the_ chair, Lord Mellifont's -- made our
grateful little group feel like a social science congress or a
distribution of prizes. Suddenly, instead of beginning, our tame lion
began to roar out of tune -- he had clean forgotten every word. He was
very sorry, but the lines absolutely wouldn't come to him; he was
utterly ashamed, but his memory was a blank. He didn't look in the least
ashamed -- Vawdrey had never looked ashamed in his life; he was only
imperturbably and merrily natural. He protested that he had never
expected to make such a fool of himself, but we felt that this wouldn't
[19] prevent the incident from taking its place among his jolliest
reminiscences. It was only _we_ who were humiliated, as if he had played
us a premeditated trick. This was an occasion, if ever, for Lord
Mellifont's tact, which descended on us all like balm: he told us, in
his charming artistic way, his way of bridging over arid intervals (he
had a _d'ebit_ -- there was nothing to approach it in England -- like
the actors of the Com'edie Fran,caise), of his own collapse on a
momentous occasion, the delivery of an address to a mighty multitude,
when, finding he had forgotten his memoranda, he fumbled, on the
terrible platform, the cynosure of every eye, fumbled vainly in
irreproachable pockets for indispensable notes. But the point of his
story was finer than that of Vawdrey's pleasantry; for he sketched with
a few light gestures the brilliancy of a performance which had risen
superior to embarrassment, had resolved itself, we were left to divine,
into an effort recognised at the moment as not absolutely a blot on what
the public was so good as to call his reputation.
  "Play up -- play up!" cried Blanche Adney, tapping her husband and
remembering how, on the stage, a _contretemps_ is always drowned in
music. Adney threw himself upon his fiddle, and I said to Clare Vawdrey
that his mistake could easily be corrected by his sending for the
manuscript. If he would tell me where it was I would immediately fetch
it from his room. To this he replied: "My dear fellow, I'm afraid there
_is_ no manuscript." [20]
  "Then you've not written anything?"
  "I'll write it to-morrow."
  "Ah, you trifle with us," I said, in much mystification.
  Vawdrey hesitated an instant. "If there _is_ anything, you'll find it
on my table."
  At this moment one of the others spoke to him, and Lady Mellifont
remarked audibly, as if to correct gently our want of consideration,
that Mr Adney was playing something very beautiful. I had noticed before
that she appeared extremely fond of music; she always listened to it in
a hushed transport. Vawdrey's attention was drawn away, but it didn't
seem to me that the words he had just dropped constituted a definite
permission to go to his room. Moreover I wanted to speak to Blanche
Adney; I had something to ask her. I had to await my chance, however, as
we remained silent awhile for her husband, after which the conversation
became general. It was our habit to go to bed early, but there was still
a little of the evening left. Before it quite waned I found an
opportunity to tell the actress that Vawdrey had given me leave to put
my hand on his manuscript. She adjured me, by all I held sacred, to
bring it immediately, to give it to her; and her insistence was proof
against my suggestion that it would now be too late for him to begin to
read: besides which the charm was broken -- the others wouldn't care. It
was not too late for _her_ to begin; therefore I was to possess myself,
without more delay, of the [21] precious pages. I told her she should be
obeyed in a moment, but I wanted her first to satisfy my just curiosity.
What had happened before dinner, while she was on the hills with Lord
Mellifont?
  "How do you know anything happened?"
  "I saw it in your face when you came back."
  "And they call me an actress!" cried Mrs Adney.
  "What do they call _me_?" I inquired.
  "You're a searcher of hearts -- that frivolous thing an observer."
  "I wish you'd let an observer write you a play!" I broke out.
  "People don't care for what you write: you'd break any run of luck."
  "Well, I see plays all round me," I declared; "the air is full of them
to-night."
  "The air? Thank you for nothing! I only wish my table-drawers were."
  "Did he make love to you on the glacier?" I went on.
  She stared; then broke into the graduated ecstasy of her laugh. "Lord
Mellifont, poor dear? What a funny place! It would indeed be the place
for _our_ love!"
  "Did he fall into a crevasse?" I continued.
  Blanche Adney looked at me again as she had done for an instant when
she came up, before dinner, with her hands full of flowers. "I don't
know into what he fell. I'll tell you to-morrow." [22]
  "He did come down, then?"
  "Perhaps he went up," she laughed. "It's really strange."
  "All the more reason you should tell me to-night."
  "I must think it over; I must puzzle it out."
  "Oh, if you want conundrums I'll throw in another," I said. "What's
the matter with the master?"
  "The master of what?"
  "Of every form of dissimulation. Vawdrey hasn't written a line."
  "Go and get his papers and we'll see."
  "I don't like to expose him," I said.
  "Why not, if I expose Lord Mellifont?"
  "Oh, I'd do anything for that," I conceded. "But why should Vawdrey
have made a false statement? It's very curious."
  "It's very curious," Blanche Adney repeated, with a musing air and her
eyes on Lord Mellifont. Then, rousing herself, she added: "Go and look
in his room."
  "In Lord Mellifont's?"
  She turned to me quickly. "_That_ would be a way!"
  "A way to what?"
  "To find out -- to find out!" She spoke gaily and excitedly, but
suddenly checked herself. "We're talking nonsense," she said.
  "We're mixing things up, but I'm struck with your idea. Get Lady
Mellifont to let you." [23]
  "Oh, _she_ has looked!" Mrs Adney murmured, with the oddest dramatic
expression. Then, after a movement of her beautiful uplifted hand, as if
to brush away a fantastic vision, she exclaimed imperiously: "Bring me
the scene -- bring me the scene!" 
  "I go for it," I answered; "but don't tell me I can't write a play."
  She left me, but my errand was arrested by the approach of a lady who
had produced a birthday-book -- we had been threatened with it for
several evenings -- and who did me the honour to solicit my autograph.
She had been asking the others, and she couldn't decently leave me out.
I could usually remember my name, but it always took me some time to
recall my date, and even when I had done so I was never very sure. I
hesitated between two days and I remarked to my petitioner that I would
sign on both if it would give her any satisfaction. She said that surely
I had been born only once; and I replied of course that on the day I
made her acquaintance I had been born again. I mention the feeble joke
only to show that, with the obligatory inspection of the other
autographs, we gave some minutes to this transaction. The lady departed
with her book, and then I became aware that the company had dispersed. I
was alone in the little salon that had been appropriated to our use. My
first impression was one of disappointment: if Vawdrey had gone to bed I
didn't wish to disturb him. While I hesitated, however, [24] I
recognised that Vawdrey had not gone to bed. A window was open, and the
sound of voices outside came in to me: Blanche was on the terrace with
her dramatist, and they were talking about the stars. I went to the
window for a glimpse -- the Alpine night was splendid. My friends had
stepped out together; the actress had picked up a cloak; she looked as I
had seen her look in the wing of the theatre. They were silent awhile,
and I heard the roar of a neighbouring torrent. I turned back into the
room, and its quiet lamplight gave me an idea. Our companions had
dispersed -- it was late for a pastoral country -- and we three should
have the place to ourselves. Clare Vawdrey had written his scene -- it
was magnificent; and his reading it to us there, at such an hour, would
be an episode intensely memorable. I would bring down his manuscript and
meet the two with it as they came in.
  I quitted the salon for this purpose; I had been in Vawdrey's room and
knew it was on the second floor, the last in a long corridor. A minute
later my hand was on the knob of his door, which I naturally pushed open
without knocking. It was equally natural that in the absence of its
occupant the room should be dark; the more so as, the end of the
corridor being at that hour unlighted, the obscurity was not immediately
diminished by the opening of the door. I was only aware at first that I
had made no mistake and that, the window-curtains not being drawn, I was
confronted with a [25] couple of vague starlighted apertures. Their aid,
however, was not sufficient to enable me to find what I had come for,
and my hand, in my pocket, was already on the little box of matches that
I always carried for cigarettes. Suddenly I withdrew it with a start,
uttering an ejaculation, an apology. I had entered the wrong room; a
glance prolonged for three seconds showed me a figure seated at a table
near one of the windows -- a figure I had at first taken for a
travelling-rug thrown over a chair. I retreated, with a sense of
intrusion; but as I did so I became aware, more rapidly than it takes me
to express it, in the first place that this was Vawdrey's room and in
the second that, most singularly, Vawdrey himself sat before me.
Checking myself on the threshold I had a momentary feeling of
bewilderment, but before I knew it I had exclaimed: "Hullo! is that you,
Vawdrey?"
  He neither turned nor answered me, but my question received an
immediate and practical reply in the opening of a door on the other side
of the passage. A servant, with a candle, had come out of the opposite
room, and in this flitting illumination I definitely recognised the man
whom, an instant before, I had to the best of my belief left below in
conversation with Mrs Adney. His back was half turned to me, and he bent
over the table in the attitude of writing, but I was conscious that I
was in no sort of error about his identity. "I beg your pardon -- I
thought you were downstairs," I said; and as the personage gave no sign
of hearing [26] me I added: "If you're busy I won't disturb you." I
backed out, closing the door -- I had been in the place, I suppose, less
than a minute. I had a sense of mystification, which however deepened
infinitely the next instant. I stood there with my hand still on the
knob of the door, overtaken by the oddest impression of my life. Vawdrey
was at his table, writing, and it was a very natural place for him to
be; but why was he writing in the dark and why hadn't he answered me? I
waited a few seconds for the sound of some movement, to see if he
wouldn't rouse himself from his abstraction -- a fit conceivable in a
great writer -- and call out: 'Oh, my dear fellow, is it you?' But I
heard only the stillness, I felt only the starlighted dusk of the room,
with the unexpected presence it enclosed. I turned away, slowly
retracing my steps, and came confusedly downstairs. The lamp was still
burning in the salon, but the room was empty. I passed round to the door
of the hotel and stepped out. Empty too was the terrace. Blanche Adney
and the gentleman with her had apparently come in. I hung about five
minutes; then I went to bed.
  I slept badly, for I was agitated. On looking back at these queer
occurrences (you will see presently that they were queer), I perhaps
suppose myself more agitated than I was; for great anomalies are never
so great at first as after we have reflected upon them. It takes us some
time to exhaust explanations. I was vaguely nervous -- [27] I had been
sharply startled; but there was nothing I could not clear up by asking
Blanche Adney, the first thing in the morning, who had been with her on
the terrace. Oddly enough, however, when the morning dawned -- it dawned
admirably -- I felt less desire to satisfy myself on this point than to
escape, to brush away the shadow of my stupefaction. I saw the day would
be splendid, and the fancy took me to spend it, as I had spent happy
days of youth, in a lonely mountain ramble. I dressed early, partook of
conventional coffee, put a big roll into one pocket and a small flask
into the other, and, with a stout stick in my hand, went forth into the
high places. My story is not closely concerned with the charming hours I
passed there -- hours of the kind that make intense memories. If I
roamed away half of them on the shoulders of the hills, I lay on the
sloping grass for the other half and, with my cap pulled over my eyes
(save a peep for immensities of view), listened, in the bright
stillness, to the mountain bee and felt most things sink and dwindle.
Clare Vawdrey grew small, Blanche Adney grew dim, Lord Mellifont grew
old, and before the day was over I forgot that I had ever been puzzled.
When in the late afternoon I made my way down to the inn there was
nothing I wanted so much to find out as whether dinner would not soon be
ready. To-night I dressed, in a manner, and by the time I was
presentable they were all at table.
  In their company again my little problem came [28] back to me, so that
I was curious to see if Vawdrey wouldn't look at me the least bit
queerly. But he didn't look at me at all; which gave me a chance both to
be patient and to wonder why I should hesitate to ask him my question
across the table. I did hesitate, and with the consciousness of doing so
came back a little of the agitation I had left behind me, or below me,
during the day. I wasn't ashamed of my scruple, however: it was only a
fine discretion. What I vaguely felt was that a public inquiry wouldn't
have been fair. Lord Mellifont was there, of course, to mitigate with
his perfect manner all consequences; but I think it was present to me
that with these particular elements his lordship would not be at home.
The moment we got up, therefore, I approached Mrs Adney, asking her
whether, as the evening was lovely, she wouldn't take a turn with me
outside.
  "You've walked a hundred miles; had you not better be quiet?" she
replied.
  "I'd walk a hundred miles more to get you to tell me something."
  She looked at me an instant, with a little of the queerness that I had
sought, but had not found, in Clare Vawdrey's eyes. "Do you mean what
became of Lord Mellifont?"
  "Of Lord Mellifont?" With my new speculation I had lost that thread.
  "Where's your memory, foolish man? We talked of it last evening."
  "Ah, yes!" I cried, recalling; "we shall have [29] lots to discuss." I
drew her out to the terrace, and before we had gone three steps I said
to her: "Who was with you here last night?"
  "Last night?" she repeated, as wide of the mark as I had been.
  "At ten o'clock -- just after our company broke up. You came out here
with a gentleman; you talked about the stars."
  She stared a moment; then she gave her laugh. "Are you jealous of dear
Vawdrey?"
  "Then it was he?"
  "Certainly it was."
  "And how long did he stay?"
  "You have it badly. He stayed about a quarter of an hour -- perhaps
rather more. We walked some distance; he talked about his play. There
you have it all; that is the only witchcraft I have used."
  "And what did Vawdrey do afterwards?"
  "I haven't the least idea. I left him and went to bed."
  "At what time did you go to bed?"
  "At what time did _you_? I happen to remember that I parted from Mr
Vawdrey at ten twenty-five," said Mrs Adney. "I came back into the salon
to pick up a book, and I noticed the clock."
  "In other words you and Vawdrey distinctly lingered here from about
five minutes past ten till the hour you mention?"
  "I don't know how distinct we were, but we were very jolly. _O`u
voulez-vous en venir_?" Blanche Adney asked. [30]
  "Simply to this, dear lady: that at the time your companion was
occupied in the manner you describe, he was also engaged in literary
composition in his own room."
  She stopped short at this, and her eyes had an expression in the
darkness. She wanted to know if I challenged her veracity; and I replied
that, on the contrary, I backed it up -- it made the case so
interesting. She returned that this would only be if she should back up
mine; which, however, I had no difficulty in persuading her to do, after
I had related to her circumstantially the incident of my quest of the
manuscript -- the manuscript which, at the time, for a reason I could
now understand, appeared to have passed so completely out of her own
head.
  "His talk made me forget it -- I forgot I sent you for it. He made up
for his fiasco in the salon: he declaimed me the scene," said my
companion. She had dropped on a bench to listen to me and, as we sat
there, had briefly cross-examined me. Then she broke out into fresh
laughter "Oh, the eccentricities of genius!"
  "They seem greater even than I supposed."
  "Oh, the mysteries of greatness!"
  "You ought to know all about them, but they take me by surprise."
  "Are you absolutely certain it was Mr Vawdrey?" my companion asked.
  "If it wasn't he, who in the world was it? That a strange gentleman,
looking exactly like him, should be sitting in his room at that hour of
the [31] night and writing at his table _in the dark_," I insisted,
"would be practically as wonderful as my own contention."
  "Yes, why in the dark?" mused Mrs Adney.
  "Cats can see in the dark," I said.
  She smiled at me dimly. "Did it look like a cat?"
  "No, dear lady, but I'll tell you what it did look like -- it looked
like the author of Vawdrey's admirable works. It looked infinitely more
like him than our friend does himself," I declared.
  "Do you mean it was somebody he gets to do them?"
  "Yes, while he dines out and disappoints you."
  "Disappoints me?" murmured Mrs Adney artlessly.
  "Disappoints _me_ -- disappoints every one who looks in him for the
genius that created the pages they adore. Where is it in his talk?"
  "Ah, last night he was splendid," said the actress.
  "He's always splendid, as your morning bath is splendid, or a sirloin
of beef, or the railway service to Brighton. But he's never rare."
  "I see what you mean."
  "That's what makes you such a comfort to talk to. I've often wondered
-- now I know. There are two of them."
  "What a delightful idea!"
  "One goes out, the other stays at home. One is the genius, the other's
the bourgeois, and it's only the bourgeois whom we personally know. He
talks, [32] he circulates, he's awfully popular, he flirts with you---"
  "Whereas it's the genius _you_ are privileged to see!" Mrs Adney broke
in. "I'm much obliged to you for the distinction."
  I laid my hand on her arm. "See him yourself. Try it, test it, go to
his room."
  "Go to his room? It wouldn't be proper!" she exclaimed, in the tone of
her best comedy.
  "Anything is proper in such an inquiry. If you see him, it settles
it."
  "How charming -- to settle it!" She thought a moment, then she sprang
up. "Do you mean _now_?"
  "Whenever you like."
  "But suppose I should find the wrong one?" said Blanche Adney, with an
exquisite effect.
  "The wrong one? Which one do you call the right?"
  "The wrong one for a lady to go and see. Suppose I shouldn't find --
the genius?"
  "Oh, I'll look after the other," I replied. Then, as I had happened to
glance about me, I added: "Take care -- here comes Lord Mellifont."
  "I wish you'd look after _him_," my interlocutress murmured.
  "What's the matter with him?"
  "That's just what I was going to tell you."
  "Tell me now; he's not coming."
  Blanche Adney looked a moment. Lord Mellifont, who appeared to have
emerged from the hotel to smoke a meditative cigar, had paused, at a
distance [33] from us, and stood admiring the wonders of the prospect,
discernible even in the dusk. We strolled slowly in another direction,
and she presently said: "My idea is almost as droll as yours."
  "I don't call mine droll: it's beautiful."
  "There's nothing so beautiful as the droll," Mrs Adney declared.
  "You take a professional view. But I'm all ears." My curiosity was
indeed alive again.
  "Well then, my dear friend, if Clare Vawdrey is double (and I'm bound
to say I think that the more of him the better), his lordship there has
the opposite complaint: he isn't even whole."
  We stopped once more, simultaneously. "I don't understand."
  "No more do I. But I have a fancy that if there are two of Mr Vawdrey,
there isn't so much as one, all told, of Lord Mellifont."
  I considered a moment, then I laughed out. "I think I see what you
mean!"
  "That's what makes _you_ a comfort. Did you ever see him alone?"
  I tried to remember. "Oh, yes; he has been to see me."
  "Ah, then he wasn't alone."
  "And I've been to see him, in his study."
  "Did he know you were there?"
  "Naturally -- I was announced."
  Blanche Adney glanced at me like a lovely conspirator. "You mustn't be
announced!" With this she walked on. [34]
  I rejoined her, breathless. "Do you mean one must come upon him when
he doesn't know it?"
  "You must take him unawares. You must go to his room -- that's what
you must do."
  If I was elated by the way our mystery opened out, I was also,
pardonably, a little confused. "When I know he's not there?"
  "When you know he _is_."
  "And what shall I see?"
  "You won't see anything!" Mrs Adney cried as we turned round.
  We had reached the end of the terrace, and our movement brought us
face to face with Lord Mellifont, who, resuming his walk, had now,
without indiscretion, overtaken us. The sight of him at that moment was
illuminating, and it kindled a great backward train, connecting itself
with one's general impression of the personage. As he stood there
smiling at us and waving a practised hand into the transparent night (he
introduced the view as if it had been a candidate and 'supported' the
very Alps), as he rose before us in the delicate fragrance of his cigar
and all his other delicacies and fragrances, with more perfections,
somehow, heaped upon his handsome head than one had ever seen
accumulated before, he struck me as so essentially, so conspicuously and
uniformly the public character that I read in a flash the answer to
Blanche Adney's riddle. He was all public and had no corresponding
private life, just as Clare Vawdrey was all private and had no
corresponding [35] public one. I had heard only half my companion's
story, yet as we joined Lord Mellifont (he had followed us -- he liked
Mrs Adney; but it was always to be conceived of him that he accepted
society rather than sought it), as we participated for half an hour in
the distributed wealth of his conversation, I felt with unabashed
duplicity that we had, as it were, found him out. I was even more deeply
diverted by that whisk of the curtain to which the actress had just
treated me than I had been by my own discovery; and if I was not ashamed
of my share of her secret any more than of having divided my own with
her (though my own was, of the two mysteries, the more glorious for the
personage involved), this was because there was no cruelty in my
advantage, but on the contrary an extreme tenderness and a positive
compassion. Oh, he was safe with me, and I felt moreover rich and
enlightened, as if I had suddenly put the universe into my pocket. I had
learned what an affair of the spot and the moment a great appearance may
be. It would doubtless be too much to say that I had always suspected
the possibility, in the background of his lordship's being, of some such
beautiful instance; but it is at least a fact that, patronising as it
sounds, I had been conscious of a certain reserve of indulgence for him.
I had secretly pitied him for the perfection of his performance, had
wondered what blank face such a mask had to cover, what was left to him
for the immitigable hours in which a man sits down [36] with himself,
or, more serious still, with that intenser self, his lawful wife. How
was he at home and what did he do when he was alone? There was something
in Lady Mellifont that gave a point to these researches -- something
that suggested that even to her he was still the public character and
that she was haunted by similar questionings. She had never cleared them
up: that was her eternal trouble. We therefore knew more than she did,
Blanche Adney and I; but we wouldn't tell her for the world, nor would
she probably thank us for doing so. She preferred the relative grandeur
of uncertainty. She was not at home with him, so she couldn't say; and
with her he was not alone, so he couldn't show her. He represented to
his wife and he was a hero to his servants, and what one wanted to
arrive at was what really became of him when no eye could see. He
rested, presumably; but what form of rest could repair such a plenitude
of presence? Lady Mellifont was too proud to pry, and as she had never
looked through a keyhole she remained dignified and unassuaged.
  It may have been a fancy of mine that Blanche Adney drew out our
companion, or it may be that the practical irony of our relation to him
at such a moment made me see him more vividly: at any rate he never had
struck me as so dissimilar from what he would have been if we had not
offered him a reflection of his image. We were only a concourse of two,
but he had never been more public. His perfect manner had never been
more perfect, [37] his remarkable tact had never been more remarkable. I
had a tacit sense that it would all be in the morning papers, with a
leader, and also a secretly exhilarating one that I knew something that
wouldn't be, that never could be, though any enterprising journal would
give one a fortune for it. I must add, however, that in spite of my
enjoyment -- it was almost sensual, like that of a consummate dish -- I
was eager to be alone again with Mrs Adney, who owed me an anecdote. It
proved impossible, that evening, for some of the others came out to see
what we found so absorbing; and then Lord Mellifont bespoke a little
music from the fiddler, who produced his violin and played to us
divinely, on our platform of echoes, face to face with the ghosts of the
mountains. Before the concert was over I missed our actress and,
glancing into the window of the salon, saw that she was established with
Vawdrey, who was reading to her from a manuscript. The great scene had
apparently been achieved and was doubtless the more interesting to
Blanche from the new lights she had gathered about its author. I judged
it discreet not to disturb them, and I went to bed without seeing her
again. I looked out for her betimes the next morning and, as the promise
of the day was fair, proposed to her that we should take to the hills,
reminding her of the high obligation she had incurred. She recognised
the obligation and gratified me with her company; but before we had
strolled ten yards up the pass she broke out with [38] intensity: "My
dear friend, you've no idea how it works in me! I can think of nothing
else."
  "Than your theory about Lord Mellifont?"
  "Oh, bother Lord Mellifont! I allude to yours about Mr Vawdrey, who is
much the more interesting person of the two. I'm fascinated by that
vision of his -- what-do-you-call-it?"
  "His alternative identity?"
  "His other self: that's easier to say."
  "You accept it, then, you adopt it?"
  "Adopt it? I rejoice in it! It became tremendously vivid to me last
evening."
  "While he read to you there?"
  "Yes, as I listened to him, watched him. It simplified everything,
explained everything."
  "That's indeed the blessing of it. Is the scene very fine?"
  "Magnificent, and he reads beautifully."
  "Almost as well as the other one writes!" I laughed.
  This made my companion stop a moment, laying her hand on my arm. "You
utter my very impression. I felt that he was reading me the work of
another man."
  "What a service to the other man!"
  "Such a totally different person," said Mrs Adney. We talked of this
difference as we went on, and of what a wealth it constituted, what a
resource for life, such a duplication of character.
  "It ought to make him live twice as long as other people," I observed.
[39]
  "Ought to make which of them?"
  "Well, both; for after all they're members of a firm, and one of them
couldn't carry on the business without the other. Moreover mere survival
would be dreadful for either."
  Blanche Adney was silent a little; then she exclaimed: "I don't know
-- I wish he _would_ survive!"
  "May I, on my side, inquire which?"
  "If you can't guess I won't tell you."
  "I know the heart of woman. You always prefer the other."
  She halted again, looking round her. "Off here, away from my husband,
I _can_ tell you. I'm in love with him!"
  "Unhappy woman, he has no passions," I answered.
  "That's exactly why I adore him. Doesn't a woman with my history know
that the passions of others are insupportable? An actress, poor thing,
can't care for any love that's not all on _her_ side; she can't afford
to be repaid. My marriage proves that: marriage is ruinous. Do you know
what was in my mind last night, all the while Mr Vawdrey was reading me
those beautiful speeches? An insane desire to see the author." And
dramatically, as if to hide her shame, Blanche Adney passed on.
  "We'll manage that," I returned. "I want another glimpse of him
myself. But meanwhile please remember that I've been waiting more than
forty-eight hours for the evidence that supports [40] your sketch,
intensely suggestive and plausible, of Lord Mellifont's private life."
  "Oh, Lord Mellifont doesn't interest me."
  "He did yesterday," I said.
  "Yes, but that was before I fell in love. You blotted him out with
your story."
  "You'll make me sorry I told it. Come," I pleaded, "if you don't let
me know how your idea came into your head I shall imagine you simply
made it up."
  "Let me recollect then, while we wander in this grassy valley."
  We stood at the entrance of a charming crooked gorge, a portion of
whose level floor formed the bed of a stream that was smooth with
swiftness. We turned into it, and the soft walk beside the clear torrent
drew us on and on; till suddenly, as we continued and I waited for my
companion to remember, a bend of the valley showed us Lady Mellifont
coming toward us. She was alone, under the canopy of her parasol,
drawing her sable train over the turf; and in this form, on the devious
ways, she was a sufficiently rare apparition. She usually took a
footman, who marched behind her on the highroads and whose livery was
strange to the mountaineers. She blushed on seeing us, as if she ought
somehow to justify herself; she laughed vaguely and said she had come
out for a little early stroll. We stood together a moment, exchanging
platitudes, and then she remarked that she had thought she might find
her husband. [41]
  "Is he in this quarter?" I inquired.
  "I supposed he would be. He came out an hour ago to sketch."
  "Have you been looking for him?" Mrs Adney asked.
  "A little; not very much," said Lady Mellifont.
  Each of the women rested her eyes with some intensity, as it seemed to
me, on the eyes of the other.
  "We'll look for him _for_ you, if you like," said Mrs Adney.
  "Oh, it doesn't matter. I thought I'd join him."
  "He won't make his sketch if you don't," my companion hinted.
  "Perhaps he will if _you_ do," said Lady Mellifont.
  "Oh, I dare say he'll turn up," I interposed.
  "He certainly will if he knows we're here!" Blanche Adney retorted.
  "Will you wait while we search?" I asked of Lady Mellifont.
  She repeated that it was of no consequence; upon which Mrs Adney went
on: "We'll go into the matter for our own pleasure."
  "I wish you a pleasant expedition," said her ladyship, and was turning
away when I sought to know if we should inform her husband that she had
followed him. She hesitated a moment; then she jerked out oddly: "I
think you had better not." With this she took leave of us, floating a
little stiffly down the gorge.
  My companion and I watched her retreat, then we exchanged a stare,
while a light ghost of a laugh [42] rippled from the actress's lips.
"She might be walking in the shrubberies at Mellifont!"
  "She suspects it, you know," I replied.
  "And she doesn't want him to know it. There won't be any sketch."
  "Unless we overtake him," I subjoined. "In that case we shall find him
producing one, in the most graceful attitude, and the queer thing is
that it will be brilliant."
  "Let us leave him alone -- he'll have to come home without it."
  "He'd rather never come home. Oh, he'll find a public!"
  "Perhaps he'll do it for the cows," Blanche Adney suggested; and as I
was on the point of rebuking her profanity she went on: "That's simply
what I happened to discover."
  "What are you speaking of?"
  "The incident of day before yesterday."
  "Ah, let's have it at last!"
  "That's all it was -- that I was like Lady Mellifont: I couldn't find
him."
  "Did you lose him?"
  "He lost _me_ -- that appears to be the way of it. He thought I was
gone."
  "But you did find him, since you came home with him."
  "It was he who found _me_. That again is what must happen. He's there
from the moment he knows somebody else is."
  "I understand his intermissions," I said after a [43] short
reflection, "but I don't quite seize the law that governs them."
  "Oh, it's a fine shade, but I caught it at that moment. I had started
to come home. I was tired, and I had insisted on his not coming back
with me. We had found some rare flowers -- those I brought home -- and
it was he who had discovered almost all of them. It amused him very
much, and I knew he wanted to get more; but I was weary and I quitted
him. He let me go -- where else would have been his tact? -- and I was
too stupid then to have guessed that from the moment I was not there no
flower would be gathered. I started homeward, but at the end of three
minutes I found I had brought away his penknife -- he had lent it to me
to trim a branch -- and I knew he would need it. I turned back a few
steps, to call him, but before I spoke I looked about for him. You can't
understand what happened then without having the place before you."
  "You must take me there," I said.
  "We may see the wonder here. The place was simply one that offered no
chance for concealment -- a great gradual hillside, without obstructions
or trees. There were some rocks below me, behind which I myself had
disappeared, but from which on coming back I immediately emerged again."
  "Then he must have seen you."
  "He was too utterly gone, for some reason best known to himself. It
was probably some moment of fatigue -- he's getting on, you know, so
that, with [44] the sense of returning solitude, the reaction had been
proportionately great, the extinction proportionately complete. At any
rate the stage was as bare as your hand."
  "Could he have been somewhere else?"
  "He couldn't have been, in the time, anywhere but where I had left
him. Yet the place was utterly empty -- as empty as this stretch of
valley before us. He had vanished -- he had ceased to be. But as soon as
my voice rang out (I uttered his name), he rose before me like the
rising sun."
  "And where did the sun rise?"
  "Just where it ought to -- just where he would have been and where I
should have seen him had he been like other people."
  I had listened with the deepest interest, but it was my duty to think
of objections. "How long a time elapsed between the moment you perceived
his absence and the moment you called?"
  "Oh, only an instant. I don't pretend it was long."
  "Long enough for you to be sure?" I said.
  "Sure he wasn't there?"
  "Yes, and that you were not mistaken, not the victim of some
hocus-pocus of your eyesight."
  "I may have been mistaken, but I don't believe it. At any rate, that's
just why I want you to look in his room."
  I thought a moment. "How _can_ I, when even his wife doesn't dare to?"
  "She _wants_ to; propose it to her. It wouldn't take much to make her.
She does suspect." [45]
  I thought another moment. "Did he seem to know?"
  "That I had missed him? So it struck me, but he thought he had been
quick enough."
  "Did you speak of his disappearance?"
  "Heaven forbid! It seemed to me too strange."
  "Quite right. And how did he look?"
  Trying to think it out again and reconstitute her miracle, Blanche
Adney gazed abstractedly up the valley. Suddenly she exclaimed: "Just as
he looks now!" and I saw Lord Mellifont stand before us with his
sketch-block. I perceived, as we met him, that he looked neither
suspicious nor blank: he looked simply, as he did always, everywhere,
the principal feature of the scene. Naturally he had no sketch to show
us, but nothing could better have rounded off our actual conception of
him than the way he fell into position as we approached. He had been
selecting his point of view; he took possession of it with a flourish of
the pencil. He leaned against a rock; his beautiful little box of
water-colours reposed on a natural table beside him, a ledge of the bank
which showed how inveterately nature ministered to his convenience. He
painted while he talked and he talked while he painted; and if the
painting was as miscellaneous as the talk, the talk would equally have
graced an album. We waited while the exhibition went on, and it seemed
indeed as if the conscious profiles of the peaks were interested in his
success. They grew as black as silhouettes in paper, sharp against [46]
a livid sky from which, however, there would be nothing to fear till
Lord Mellifont's sketch should be finished. Blanche Adney communed with
me dumbly, and I could read the language of her eyes: 'Oh, if _we_ could
only do it as well as that! He fills the stage in a way that beats us.'
We could no more have left him than we could have quitted the theatre
till the play was over; but in due time we turned round with him and
strolled back to the inn, before the door of which his lordship,
glancing again at his picture, tore the fresh leaf from the block and
presented it with a few happy words to Mrs Adney. Then he went into the
house; and a moment later, looking up from where we stood, we saw him,
above, at the window of his sitting-room (he had the best apartments),
watching the signs of the weather.
  "He'll have to rest after this," Blanche said, dropping her eyes on
her water-colour.
  "Indeed he will!" I raised mine to the window: Lord Mellifont had
vanished. "He's already reabsorbed."
  "Reabsorbed?" I could see the actress was now thinking of something
else.
  "Into the immensity of things. He has lapsed again; there's an
_entr'acte_."
  "It ought to be long." Mrs Adney looked up and down the terrace, and
at that moment the head-waiter appeared in the doorway. Suddenly she
turned to this functionary with the question: "Have you seen Mr Vawdrey
lately?" [47]
  The man immediately approached. "He left the house five minutes ago --
for a walk, I think. He went down the pass; he had a book."
  I was watching the ominous clouds. "He had better have had an
umbrella."
  The waiter smiled. "I recommended him to take one."
  "Thank you," said Mrs Adney; and the Oberkellner withdrew. Then she
went on, abruptly: "Will you do me a favour?"
  "Yes, if you'll do _me_ one. Let me see if your picture is signed."
  She glanced at the sketch before giving it to me. "For a wonder it
isn't."
  "It ought to be, for full value. May I keep it awhile?"
  "Yes, if you'll do what I ask. Take an umbrella and go after Mr
Vawdrey."
  "To bring him to Mrs Adney?"
  "To keep him out -- as long as you can."
  "I'll keep him as long as the rain holds off."
  "Oh, never mind the rain!" my companion exclaimed.
  "Would you have us drenched?"
  "Without remorse." Then with a strange light in her eyes she added:
"I'm going to try."
  "To try?"
  "To see the real one. Oh, if I can get at him!" she broke out with
passion.
  "Try, try!" I replied. "I'll keep our friend all day." [48]
  "If I can get at the one who does it" -- and she paused, with shining
eyes -- "if I can have it out with him I shall get my part!"
  "I'll keep Vawdrey for ever!" I called after her as she passed quickly
into the house.
  Her audacity was communicative, and I stood there in a glow of
excitement. I looked at Lord Mellifont's water-colour and I looked at
the gathering storm; I turned my eyes again to his lordship's windows
and then I bent them on my watch. Vawdrey had so little the start of me
that I should have time to overtake him -- time even if I should take
five minutes to go up to Lord Mellifont's sitting-room (where we had all
been hospitably received), and say to him, as a messenger, that Mrs
Adney begged he would bestow upon his sketch the high consecration of
his signature. As I again considered this work of art I perceived there
was something it certainly did lack: what else then but so noble an
autograph? It was my duty to supply the deficiency without delay, and in
accordance with this conviction I instantly re-entered the hotel. I went
up to Lord Mellifont's apartments; I reached the door of his salon.
Here, however, I was met by a difficulty of which my extravagance had
not taken account. If I were to knock I should spoil everything; yet was
I prepared to dispense with this ceremony? I asked myself the question,
and it embarrassed me; I turned my little picture round and round, but
it didn't give me the answer I wanted. I wanted [49] it to say: 'Open
the door gently, gently, without a sound, yet very quickly: then you
will see what you will see.' I had gone so far as to lay my hand upon
the knob when I became aware (having my wits so about me), that exactly
in the manner I was thinking of -- gently, gently, without a sound --
another door had moved, on the opposite side of the hall. At the same
instant I found myself smiling rather constrainedly upon Lady Mellifont,
who, on seeing me, had checked herself on the threshold of her room. For
a moment, as she stood there, we exchanged two or three ideas that were
the more singular for being unspoken. We had caught each other hovering,
and we understood each other; but as I stepped over to her (so that we
were separated from the sitting-room by the width of the hall), her lips
formed the almost soundless entreaty: "Don't!" I could see in her
conscious eyes everything that the word expressed -- the confession of
her own curiosity and the dread of the consequences of mine. "_Don't_!"
she repeated, as I stood before her. From the moment my experiment could
strike her as an act of violence I was ready to renounce it; yet I
thought I detected in her frightened face a still deeper betrayal -- a
possibility of disappointment if I should give way. It was as if she had
said: 'I'll let you do it if you'll take the responsibility. Yes, with
some one else I'd surprise him. But it would never do for him to think
it was I.'
  "We soon found Lord Mellifont," I observed, in [50] allusion to our
encounter with her an hour before, "and he was so good as to give this
lovely sketch to Mrs Adney, who has asked me to come up and beg him to
put in the omitted signature."
  Lady Mellifont took the drawing from me, and I could guess the
struggle that went on in her while she looked at it. She was silent for
some time; then I felt that all her delicacies and dignities, all her
old timidities and pieties were fighting against her opportunity. She
turned away from me and, with the drawing, went back to her room. She
was absent for a couple of minutes, and when she reappeared I could see
that she had vanquished her temptation; that even, with a kind of
resurgent horror, she had shrunk from it. She had deposited the sketch
in the room. "If you will kindly leave the picture with me, I will see
that Mrs Adney's request is attended to," she said, with great courtesy
and sweetness, but in a manner that put an end to our colloquy.
  I assented, with a somewhat artificial enthusiasm perhaps, and then,
to ease off our separation, remarked that we were going to have a change
of weather.
  "In that case we shall go -- we shall go immediately," said Lady
Mellifont. I was amused at the eagerness with which she made this
declaration: it appeared to represent a coveted flight into safety, an
escape with her threatened secret. I was the more surprised therefore
when, as I was turning away, she put out her hand to take mine. She had
[51] the pretext of bidding me farewell, but as I shook hands with her
on this supposition I felt that what the movement really conveyed was:
'I thank you for the help you would have given me, but it's better as it
is. If I should know, who would help me then?' As I went to my room to
get my umbrella I said to myself: 'She's sure, but she won't put it to
the proof.'
  A quarter of an hour later I had overtaken Clare Vawdrey in the pass,
and shortly after this we found ourselves looking for refuge. The storm
had not only completely gathered, but it had broken at the last with
extraordinary rapidity. We scrambled up a hillside to an empty cabin, a
rough structure that was hardly more than a shed for the protection of
cattle. It was a tolerable shelter however, and it had fissures through
which we could watch the splendid spectacle of the tempest. This
entertainment lasted an hour -- an hour that has remained with me as
full of odd disparities. While the lightning played with the thunder and
the rain gushed in on our umbrellas, I said to myself that Clare Vawdrey
was disappointing. I don't know exactly what I should have predicated of
a great author exposed to the fury of the elements, I can't say what
particular Manfred attitude I should have expected my companion to
assume, but it seemed to me somehow that I shouldn't have looked to him
to regale me in such a situation with stories (which I had already
heard), about the celebrated Lady Ringrose. Her ladyship formed the
subject [52] of Vawdrey's conversation during this prodigious scene,
though before it was quite over he had launched out on Mr Chafer, the
scarcely less notorious reviewer. It broke my heart to hear a man like
Vawdrey talk of reviewers. The lightning projected a hard clearness upon
the truth, familiar to me for years, to which the last day or two had
added transcendent support -- the irritating certitude that for personal
relations this admirable genius thought his second-best good enough. It
_was_, no doubt, as society was made, but there was a contempt in the
distinction which could not fail to be galling to an admirer. The world
was vulgar and stupid, and the real man would have been a fool to come
out for it when he could gossip and dine by deputy. None the less my
heart sank as I felt my companion practice this economy. I don't know
exactly what I wanted; I suppose I wanted him to make an exception for
_me_. I almost believed he would, if he had known how I worshipped his
talent. But I had never been able to translate this to him, and his
application of his principle was relentless. At any rate I was more than
ever sure that at such an hour his chair at home was not empty: _there_
was the Manfred attitude, _there_ were the responsive flashes. I could
only envy Mrs Adney her presumable enjoyment of them.
  The weather drew off at last, and the rain abated sufficiently to
allow us to emerge from our asylum and make our way back to the inn,
where we found [53] on our arrival that our prolonged absence had
produced some agitation. It was judged apparently that the fury of the
elements might have placed us in a predicament. Several of our friends
were at the door, and they seemed a little disconcerted when it was
perceived that we were only drenched. Clare Vawdrey, for some reason,
was wetter than I, and he took his course to his room. Blanche Adney was
among the persons collected to look out for us, but as Vawdrey came
toward her she shrank from him, without a greeting; with a movement that
I observed as almost one of estrangement she turned her back on him and
went quickly into the salon. Wet as I was I went in after her; on which
she immediately flung round and faced me. The first thing I saw was that
she had never been so beautiful. There was a light of inspiration in her
face, and she broke out to me in the quickest whisper, which was at the
same time the loudest cry, I have ever heard: "I've got my _part_!"
  "You went to his room -- I was right?"
  "Right?" Blanche Adney repeated. "Ah, my dear fellow!" she murmured.
  "He was there -- you saw him?"
  "He saw me. It was the hour of my life!"
  "It must have been the hour of his, if you were half as lovely as you
are at this moment."
  "He's splendid," she pursued, as if she didn't hear me. "He _is_ the
one who does it!" I listened, immensely impressed, and she added: "We
understood each other." [54]
  "By flashes of lightning?"
  "Oh, I didn't see the lightning then!"
  "How long were you there?" I asked with admiration.
  "Long enough to tell him I adore him."
  "Ah, that's what I've never been able to tell him!" I exclaimed
ruefully.
  "I shall have my part -- I shall have my part!" she continued, with
triumphant indifference; and she flung round the room with the joy of a
girl, only checking herself to say: "Go and change your clothes."
  "You shall have Lord Mellifont's signature," I said.
  "Oh, bother Lord Mellifont's signature! He's far nicer than Mr
Vawdrey," she went on irrelevantly.
  "Lord Mellifont?" I pretended to inquire.
  "Confound Lord Mellifont!" And Blanche Adney, in her elation, brushed
by me, whisking again through the open door. Just outside of it she came
upon her husband; whereupon, with a charming cry of "We're talking of
you, my love!" she threw herself upon him and kissed him.
  I went to my room and changed my clothes, but I remained there till
the evening. The violence of the storm had passed over us, but the rain
had settled down to a drizzle. On descending to dinner I found that the
change in the weather had already broken up our party. The Mellifonts
had departed in a carriage and four, they had been followed by others,
and several vehicles had been [55] bespoken for the morning. Blanche
Adney's was one of them, and on the pretext that she had preparations to
make she quitted us directly after dinner. Clare Vawdrey asked me what
was the matter with her -- she suddenly appeared to dislike him. I
forget what answer I gave, but I did my best to comfort him by driving
away with him the next day. Mrs Adney had vanished when we came down;
but they made up their quarrel in London, for he finished his play,
which she produced. I must add that she is still, nevertheless, in want
of the great part. I have a beautiful one in my head, but she doesn't
come to see me to stir me up about it. Lady Mellifont always drops me a
kind word when we meet, but that doesn't console me. 
